So much, um, for joining us early in the morning
for a relatively long, long day.
But, um, important scrutiny of, um, the, uh,
a big department that does a lot of work for New Zealand.
Um, we, we do have you here for a, a long period of time,
and we do have some ministers attending
throughout, uh, the day.
Yes. And a few breaks as well.
Um, or, uh, just try
and keep to, generally to the structured agenda,
but if things come up at, at times, um,
hopefully we'll both try and be flexible around that.
Um, but because it is a, a longer hearing,
we do have a bit more time for some opening comments.
So hand over to you. Welcome.
Thank you chair. And I will be brief in opening comments.
I'm conscious that the committee has built a good body
of knowledge of the work of
DIA over the last couple of years.
You've considered a number of bills
that our minister's been promoting through this committee.
So, uh, I think there's a, as I said,
a strong base level of knowledge.
Um, as you know, department Internal Affairs is a diverse,
broad and busy department, uh,
that serves all New Zealanders in some shape
or form range of services.
We support six ministerial portfolios, so internal affairs,
digitizing government, local government,
ministerial services, community and voluntary sector,
and the racing portfolio.
Uh, all of our work connects
to five outcomes in some way or shape and form.
Uh, and we deliver essential services to the executive, uh,
but also to New Zealanders around their identity.
We support local government.
We uphold regulatory standards, provide systems,
stewardship, and a arrange of systems.
And we support communities through grants funding
and safety initiatives.
I would like to just identify, uh, a couple
of highlights from the year, and then
I look forward to your questions.
So we also monitor the performance of Three Crown entities,
um, and we host to, uh, the departmental agency,
so the Ministry of Ethnic Communities,
but also the National Emergency Manager Authority.
Joined, uh, this year as a hosted agency,
had a busy year focused on service delivery.
Uh, we're now issuing 99% of passports on time,
both standard service and urgent service.
Uh, we have reduced, uh, the number
of citizenship applications on hand,
significantly down to 8,000.
I think. When we came to estimates about 18 months ago,
we had around 28,000 on hand.
So you can see the effort that's gone into pulling down the
processing time across that important service.
Uh, national Library's papers passed, which is one of our,
um, most popular services.
Another half a million pages have been digitized
and added to that service through, uh,
of newspapers and periodicals.
Uh, completed the construction
of a new archival facility just across the road.
Um, on time, on budget, uh, it opens in 2026,
supported the passage of the local government, uh,
water services bill, um, now act,
and we are assessing council water service delivery plans.
Almost complete the assessment of all those plans.
In May this year, we launched the New Zealand Verifier app,
uh, which is an app which supports the verification
of digital identity credentials.
Uh, currently the primary uses, uh, rental car companies,
uh, verifying Australian
and New Zealand digital, uh, uh, Australian
and American Digital driver's licenses.
But as we start to see the, uh, credentialization
of New Zealand identity, uh, credentials such
as driver's license, we'll see
that becoming an important part
of the public service architecture.
These are just some examples of what we've achieved.
Uh, chair, I look forward to you
and the committee's questions, and I'm joined by selection
of leaders from across the department
who will support me in answering your
Questions. Thank you so much. And I just
ask if anyone does, um,
join the table.
Uh, please feel free to come
and sit up at the table, um, in any of the available seats.
And just if you, uh, just state your name
and position, um, for the record
As well. You do,
uh, come to join us. We'll start with Andy.
I'm gonna ask a little question
because you started with citizenship, um,
and that is just how the progress has been on,
given the committee's interest in the Western
Smart citizenship bill.
Mm-hmm. Just where we've landed with that, um, in terms
of the number of applications, number
Granted, well, I'll invite the deputy secretary,
Rachel Alta was responsible to join the table.
Uh, but just start again by, uh,
once more thanking the committee
for their support through the legislation. Um, thank
You, your team as well.
It was an example, I think, of pretty good mood
that was done quite quickly in
response to real pressure and need.
So, uh, Rachel, please feel free to join me.
Um, as, uh, when we, um, were at our estimates hearing,
we talked then about, uh, the numbers
of applications that had come through.
Uh, were a little bit up and what we expect is thousand
and, um, the vast majority, um, had been, um,
processed on time.
Um, you had a question there about
how many were coming from Saama versus New Zealand.
I think we followed up for some information. Sure.
So let's just give us the current,
current situation of where we're at here.
Good Morning Committee. My name is Rachel Lita.
I'm the Deputy Secretary for Regulatory
and Identity Services at the Department of Internal Affairs.
I thank you for your question. Uh,
things are going very well with regards to the citizenship
for Western Samor.
Uh, we are moving through very quickly, uh, with applicants.
And I think out of the estimate, uh, that we had,
we've probably got, uh, less than a few hundred
that could possibly still apply.
Um, so we are continuing to work, uh, with Post, um,
and RP, uh, to ensure that that people who are eligible, uh,
can apply.
Um, last time, as Paul mentioned,
committee was worried about the refunds that were occurring,
and we have actually improved that process.
So, um, instead of taking about six to eight weeks, uh, for,
uh, for refunds to be made from applicants in our peer,
we are now, um, managing that within a one
to 10 day, um, timeframe. One timeframe, 10 day.
Nice. Yes. Sorry,
Stop on that. Uh,
yes, it's okay. Sorry,
I think I just missed I saying the total numbers
of applicants and what the percentage was that succeeded.
Yes, I will come back to you with the exact numbers,
but, um, because it's been going for so long, now,
we are down to the last few hundred people who could be, um,
eligible who are yet to apply.
Um, but we have processed, I think, um,
it was of about 3000.
I think there's several thousand people
potentially eligible.
And we think the vast majority
of those have now applied and been successful.
So we can get the comp, it's compulsory,
It's Not compulsory entirely. Right.
Sorry, those numbers are updated
to what's in the annual report,
which is about 2,131 applied 2011
grants and only 13
Declined. Yes, that's right. So
It's a huge number. It's
a huge number. It's been really positive,
Has been very successful
and great to see the uptake, um, for,
for those people who are eligible.
Can I just, can I just question?
Sorry, I just finished my question. Okay.
Yeah. Okay. So let's just say, do we know also,
so you said you've given us some idea
of the samo Samoan based versus New Zealand based,
but also do we know if that's changed people's domicile?
In other words, whether they've used it to say, actually,
I now wanna move from Samoa to New Zealand,
or it's just it is great.
'cause now I can travel easy.
We, yeah, we don't know. We're not tracking.
We not tracking. Okay.
Once, um, they apply, they've got the, the passport,
they can choose to, to use those passports and,
and obviously, um, make decisions that suits them best.
Okay, thanks. Yeah. Okay, Tom, and then
What happens next thing, if you've had most people apply,
um, you wind down, how does that work?
Because obviously it's for a catchment period
of time, so that's Right.
Right. There are not future applicants, right?
That's right. So the, so it's for a certain, um, period
of time, um, when people were born.
So, uh, you know, obviously they'll be eligible to, to apply
and until, until they're no longer with us.
Yeah. Um, so we'll just be able to keep that going.
But essentially, um, as committee has,
has made it clear people have taken up that opportunity.
It's been, well, um, publicized.
People have, have taken the decisions they'd like to make.
But, uh, you know, for people who are eligible in
that cohort, uh, they'll be able to apply up until, you
Know, I think I'm, what I'm getting at is, did you have
to scale up your resourcing and internal affairs?
Understand now they need to make adjustments.
So we, we, um, manage between, um, 35
and 40,000 citizenship applications a year.
Mm-hmm. So if there's three to 4,000,
you can see it's about a 10% increase.
So we've been able to manage
that essentially with an existing resources.
But we have got eyes to significantly increasing, uh,
applications coming through in about 12 to 18 months,
which is a result of post COVID immigration increases. So,
So, sorry, you are forecasting
that over the next 12 to 18 months,
In about 12 to 18 months,
we'll see a significant increase in citizenship
applications, potentially a doubling as a result of, uh, um,
yeah, uh, post COVID immigration increases.
So it just gives you an example of the, um,
I guess the workflows are lumpy.
Like there's a base that's pretty common,
but then there are lumps and actually three to 4,000 nice
Amounts Manageable compared to some
of the other volume increases.
Thank you.
We'll go to your s and then if anyone has any, um,
questions on this same subject area, let me know.
Otherwise we'll move on to your primary after this.
Yep, sure. Um, thank you. Thanks for the report.
Um, I've had a number of families come into the office, uh,
um, they're very pleased at the opportunity, uh,
and they've brought their elderly parents over
and who it's been quite a transformation for that family.
Uh, so I wanted to give that feedback,
but also to the IMP that have been made
with immigration service in Samoa.
So I've had quite a lot of feedback
and I was asked to speak at the, um, at the
independent staff, just giving a report.
'cause I then spoke to specific families about immigration.
The, um, the, um, comments that I wanted
to make was just in terms of the language specificity,
how did that all go in terms of operations from
AP peer office to here in terms of the request
of citizenship and all of those processes?
Processes? Um, you mean between, between APIA and,
and here in New Zealand?
Yeah. My understanding of things have gone quite smoothly.
I mean, there's been a lot of communication going on
between, uh, the museum post as well, uh,
and RP to ensure that
that things are as seamless as possible.
So I haven't been, had been brought to my attention,
at least at recent months, uh,
that there's been any particular issues,
uh, with the application process.
I think we had people who went
to Samoa when this initiated to make sure
that it's good connections on ground
with the posting the office there.
So just didn and stay,
but just get things set up working effectively.
And were there efficiencies, sort of at the start,
you would've had quite a rush from different individuals
over the years, and then you would've probably had families
from here trying to understand the processes.
Were there efficiencies made as time went on?
Uh, well, I think, uh, there's been a lot of, uh,
improvements around citizenship.
Um, as Paul mentioned earlier, we've, um, really cracked,
um, the backlog of applications.
So there's been a lot of efficiencies, uh, through some
of our system changes and the way that we've been, um,
working with our teams, uh, to ensure that the wait times
for citizenship overall has reduced significantly.
We tried to, when this came through,
to just build on the base
of existing citizenship policies and processes.
So of course, recognize the eligibility,
but post that it was really, uh, pretty common
to our existing policies
and processes, which meant that our staff could adjust
quickly and it was also familiar to customers.
Um, so that was part of our approach.
Was there any increase in terms of the language component
that you required one
or two more offices with Sam language
that could really help answer the
Questions? Um,
we, we already translate material into multiple
languages, uh, for customers, including samo.
Um, we actually have quite a large number of Samoan staff,
particularly in that area.
So, and we have expertise through the translation services,
uh, which is a, a function housed in DIA.
So we translate material into samo and, um, and,
and we do that across a range
of our service lines already as well.
Okay. Thanks. That's myself. I can move. Yep.
So just shifting the focus. Um, but thank you for that.
That's really helpful to understand.
Um, really have a question just around, um, the focus,
the organizational focus, uh, in terms of the strategic, um,
pathways that you opened up with your earlier comments,
I just wanted to ask about the VIP transport services.
Um, given the department's current work in upgrading,
can you, um, explain to the committee, uh, in terms of, uh,
the upgrades, uh, and the VIP transport chauffeur fleet?
And have there been any that can just unpack that for us?
Yeah, sure. And by fine land,
but is the deputy secretary responsible for that
to join us at the table and speak to part of that as well?
This is a really important service for us, VIP transport.
Um, it is for both the executive,
but also senior members of the judiciary
and, uh, plays an important role, uh, in government visits,
so obviously delegations, et cetera.
So it's an important service for us to get right.
Our staff are hardworking, professional
and take a lot of responsibility and care for the service.
Uh, we are modernizing updating that includes both, uh,
the depots and facilities there as we start
to electrify part of the fleet.
Um, but we're also looking at, uh, swapping out
and updating the vehicle fleet.
And Haina, you might speak in a little bit
more detail, just that,
Uh, K Lambert, uh,
deputy Secretary Partnerships and Commissions.
Um, part of my area is ministerial services, including, uh,
VIP transport.
Uh, so for about the last six years, uh, we've been going
through a process of modernizing
and diversifying, uh, the VIP fleet, um, as well as, uh,
introducing EV infrastructure, uh,
into our depots around the country.
Uh, the Crown fleet includes 18 class one vehicles,
which are diesel powered BNW seven series.
Um, they've been in service now since 2016
and are now at the end of their operational life.
Uh, the department has begun, uh,
the replacement process for these.
Uh, the aim is for the future Crown fleet
to be better aligned with service needs
and deliver cost savings.
Uh, and we aim to do this
by reducing the overall fleet size, uh,
by approximately five to 10 vehicles
and by allocating vehicles more efficiently, uh,
to provide transport services to its customers.
And this includes expansion to the Class two fleet, uh,
which are the smaller, uh, vehicles that we use for some
of our shorter trips in urban areas.
Uh, the department has undertaken a formal process
to identify and evaluate options
to replace the Class one fleet, prioritizing value
for money, ensuring vehicles are fit for purpose
and align with low emissions principles.
Um, 10 battery electric vehicles have been ordered
for the new fleet, and these will be operational, uh,
in part by the end of this year.
Uh, infrastructure upgrades have been completed at VIP
Transport Depots, uh, to support the modernized crown fleet
with efficient ev charging, uh,
to provide assurance on our approach, uh,
and independent quality assurance process,
uh, was completed.
Uh, the assessment of our overall strategy indicated
that the VIP transport, uh, approach has a fit
for purpose vehicle management framework.
Um, the replacement of the 18 class one vehicles as part
of the department's phased crown fleet replacement strategy,
um, internal capital was used, uh,
to fund the replacement approximately 5.7 million, uh,
over four financial years.
And it's our intention to, rather than have to do, uh,
a major replacement of all vehicles at once,
that we will now be doing a phased replacement annually.
Thank you, Ani. Really appreciate
That. Up,
up
Carry. Um,
oh, no, sorry. Sorry. You carry on the moment.
I just wanted to ask, um, in terms,
and it's really helpful to have, receive the explanation,
um, but also understand sort of the phasing approach
and where proficiencies are, um, do the, uh,
drivers can be uniform, and what is the cost of that?
And sort of how long, like does it change every five years
or the government, the process?
Yes, as, as you can imagine, um, there's, um, lots of, uh,
views around, uh, uniforms for any staff
and any occupation, uh,
and would be no surprise that our, uh, drivers, um,
look at the uniform
and want to be seen to be proud as they're wearing it.
Um, we have recently run a process of refreshing,
uh, the uniforms for our drivers.
Uh, we have an existing budget, uh, for uniform replacement.
And so we are going through the process of replacing, uh,
those uniforms.
Uh, you will notice a slight change in color.
Uh, so they'll be going from a dark charcoal, uh, suit color
to a rather smart navy, uh,
and they'll be retaining the, uh, ties
and we will have a further option
around shirts, uh, for them.
Uh, but we're doing that within our existing operational
budgets, um,
because we have to put aside money anyway
for those uniform replacements over time.
So, last question chair.
Um, what's the sort of costing of that budget?
Is it like a sort of a term budget
or is it added to subtracted to, in terms of sustaining
the requirements of the,
So, um, what, I'd like to just come back
with the exact figures for that amount, if that's okay.
Sure. But I just wanted to assure the committee
that we are doing it within our existing
operating budgets. Thanks,
You. Thank you, Celia. Thank you. Thank
you. Um, just a couple
of supplementaries on that.
Um, the 10 B EVs,
could you buy any other V vehicles
or were you actually saying that a hundred percent were
battery electric?
I wasn't quite clear on that.
Oh, sorry. Could you, uh,
So, um, that's in respect to the class one.
We've got a range of classes in the fleet.
We've already started electrifying
across parts of the fleet.
This is the limousine cars, if you like.
It's the, uh, the higher end. And so
It's a hundred percent, No,
It's not, no. Okay.
So for example, uh, there is a highly, uh,
secure vehicle as part of the fleet
or a proof, uh, that cannot be battery powered.
It's just too heavy. You couldn't run a battery powered.
So it's not entirely electrified.
There will be some retained, uh, that still combust in
The hear what the percentage.
Thank you. Um, and yeah, no, I'm not going
to ask about the uniform move on.
Okay. Um, primary or some separate. Okay. Um, so Tom,
Um, keen to talk about your revenue and expenditure.
I see both have declined over the last year.
Can you just talk us through that initially please?
Yeah, so, um, in an organization like Department
of Internal Affairs, there was a lot of changes from year
to year in both our revenue
expenses, but particularly in revenue.
Uh, what we have is a lot of time limited funding that comes
to an end, and that has a real impact, I guess,
in terms of the overall picture.
So, uh, in particular, you know, there's some little things,
uh, funds, for example, uh, safer Communities fund,
et cetera, that put in place post Mosco
tax that's come to an end.
So several million dollars,
things like the local Water Done Well program
where we had a range of, uh, payments being made as part of
that, those have come to an end.
So that all has an impact in terms
of the overall revenue position.
Uh, other key revenue drivers then is Crown funding,
which there has been reductions of.
So, um, in, uh, uh, post last election,
there was the baseline reduction program, which saw seven
and a half percent reduction in revenue.
Um, and then we have, uh, about 40%
of our revenue is third party funded.
So it's fee, uh, fee for service.
Yeah, 37%, so passports, et cetera.
So that's volume dependent.
So you can see fluctuations in reviews around the volumes,
but the overall reduction is more about time limited funding
coming to an end across a range of sources.
Um, one of your, uh, largest expenses
that was significantly reduced was your spend on consultants
and outsourcing contractors.
Um, yes. In light of what you spend on a year to year basis,
it is a drop in the ocean,
but it's the, I guess the optics of it.
Yes. Um, for example, last year it was 26.4 million,
and this year it was down to 13.2, which is bang on half.
Yep. Can you talk us through what
changes you made in that space?
Yes. Um, we made a number of changes.
So one of the key things was, um,
the closing down in some major programs, for example, local,
have done well is not, uh, we don't have a lot
of water engineers permanently on staff.
So we were upscaling some skills
and expertise that had an impact.
We also had two very large programs worked,
the new archives building
and also replacement of the under technology and passports.
Uh, and that both required, uh,
more than average if you'd like,
expenditure socks and contractors.
However, what we did, uh, also see is
that actually we were just spending more across the board
and more than we were comfortable spending across the board.
So, uh, we didn't want to just observe
that there were those large peaks is actually
we had to bring down the base.
So we changed internal controls,
internal transparency and visibility.
We lifted up decision rights.
A whole lot of things have to come to me now
for being, uh, signed off.
Mm-hmm. And we have tried to push down, uh,
the expenditure across the board and contracts
and consultants, and it's been very successful.
So people now know there's a very high threshold in order
to engage a contractor or a consultant.
What's your proposed target
for further reductions in expenditure by the end
of 20 25, 26?
So in terms of contracts
and consultants, or just generally? Uh,
Both. Please.
In terms of contracts and consultants,
the PSC has a benchmark, I think it's 10% of, um,
your staff, uh, expenses.
Mm-hmm. Your consultants,
contractors should be no more than that.
We're at about three or 4%, I think. Mm-hmm.
So, um, look, we, we haven't got a target per se, rather,
we just wanna maintain the controls.
So individual decisions are good decisions. Yeah.
And, um, uh, keep it track
and transparent in terms of, uh, wider revenue.
Um, we are always looking at
how we can be more efficient and effective.
So a couple of things
that draw to the committee's attention.
We've just concluded, uh,
fiscal sustainability program over the last nine months
inside the department that's been aimed at bringing down our
overall cost structures, ensuring that we've got funding
to make cost pressures that are coming our way.
So rent is going up, rates are going up,
we're about to enter bargaining.
There will be remuneration increases across our staff.
We need to meet that within existing funding.
So we've gone through a process of
freeing up funding from other sources to an order us
to may able meet future costs.
So that's been an important part, uh, of our plan.
The other key thing is, uh, um, in some of our, um,
third party funded areas, in particular, passports
had fee increases, but those fee increases have priced
in a further efficiency.
So we are looking to drive out cost from our services,
and we're just putting that lens across all aspects
of our, our work at the
Moment. So what would
be the proposed target?
30% efficiency, um, target, uh, in passports,
Sorry, not, not, not passport,
but around, uh, expenditure in total.
So if I note, say for this year, uh,
your expenditure was 624 million, which was
down from 687.1 the year prior, uh, would you be looking
to track that down below 600,
for example, for the next year?
No, we don't, we don't have a target around that, per se.
And that's partly because some
of the services are demand driven
and they're not predictable, and they're quite,
quite big elements in particular passports, for example.
But, uh, in the fiscal sustainability program, we aimed to,
um, find $12 million.
Uh, so you can see that percentage is about two
to 3% of that overall base.
But that will help us meet cost pressures.
But otherwise we just aim to be as efficient
as we can across all aspects of,
Thank you. Just
got suck from Andy, and then we'll move to the model.
Yeah. It's just, um, as you've gone through that process,
so obviously you, you've made the comment a couple times
that you felt at times, well, hang on,
we're spending a bit too much here or not,
I'm not sure we're comfortable with that.
In terms of value for money, are there any sort of,
um, uh, lessons you've got?
'cause obviously the department over time has got to
that point, and then you've gone, oh, hang on, we've gone,
maybe we've gone a little bit far,
now we're gonna draw it back.
Are there any lessons that you've, um, come to in terms
of trying to make sure that doesn't happen again?
Because you, you do have a very diverse, um, organization
that temptations obviously to go.
We put some more there and bit more there
and bit more there, and then
suddenly you've got quite a lot.
It, it's a, uh, a very good question.
So probably one of the key lessons we've, uh, learned is
that, um, as the nature of our mandates
and functions change, which is often the case with the,
we get new functions, things change in
nature and volumes changed.
Uh, we just manage that point
by point in the individual business lines as opposed
to having, I guess, more
of a coherent picture across the organization.
That's what's been Happening.
So that meant that in places we were probably duplicating
capability, uh, building things twice as opposed
to once using it twice.
The other real insight we gained is that we've, uh, pretty,
uh, strict and transparent controls
around finance and expenditure.
We didn't have the same level of controls around,
uh, people decisions.
So, uh, where we make employment decisions,
we would make decisions around remuneration.
We make decisions around using fixed
volume roles, et cetera.
So we are strengthening our internal controls around those
because it has a big flow through, uh, through the,
about half of our expenditure is on people.
So we are strengthening the controls internally on
people related decisions.
That's the real insight from the last 12 months. Thank you.
Yeah. The longer. Thanks, ris.
Um, well, I just, I'm really interested in the passports.
So you've had quite change in terms of the processes.
What I wanted to ask was,
you've changed it from the English name first to the,
how was that decision made and when was that decision made?
Yeah, so, um, we, uh, are just in a normal cycle
of updating the passport book that's really driven
around security considerations.
So we need to make sure we're on a cycle.
We have contracts with Canadian Bank now
to provide the book, and we update our security features
regularly, and we swap out the book on a normal cycle,
which is about every eight, six to eight years, I think.
Um, and as part of that process, we've been
through design phase.
The government has a, uh, preference
of English first at the moment.
Um, and that's been communicated to us as a preference.
And so we've responded to the government preference, uh,
retained Maori on the front of the book.
We've just flipped the order.
Thank you. Can you just unpack, um, if you can,
just in terms of the security considerations when you are
doing the sort of the whole phase
changing the passport itself?
Yes, sure. Look, I'll make a start,
but I'm happy for, um, uh, Rachel make contribution too.
So, uh, the passport book is actually fascinating, um,
in terms of the layers of security that are built in,
in terms of watermarking and all sorts of biometrics
and other components to it.
These are really important in terms
of protecting the integrity
of the passport and the passport system.
That's the focus. So we haven't changed the, uh, English
and Maori branding, um, outside of a cycle
of asset replacement, if you like.
We're already due to update the book.
So just through that process, we've done that.
Greg, you might like to speak a bit more to some
of the security functions that have
been the focus of the update.
Sure. Um, so, uh, New Zealand has a very,
um, powerful passport.
I'm sure the committee is aware of that.
You know, we rated sort of, uh, seventh in the world.
Um, and the reason for that is really a lot to do
with the security features within our passports.
Um, the International Civil Aviation organization, IKO, uh,
the, uh, prescribers of security features.
And, uh, we, uh, very much involved in those working groups
that actually set those security features.
Uh, and, uh, we take those responsibilities very seriously
and as consequence, uh, ensure
that they are available in our passports.
And they essentially allow for, um, you know, visa wavering
as for so many countries, uh, around the world.
Uh, they allow for easy access, uh, for gates to open, um,
to be recognized, um, in the way
that New Zealanders expect to travel.
Uh, so there are numerous security features,
uh, and passports.
And from, um, book, uh, redevelopment to book redevelopment,
you know, there are further enhancements
and as Paul said, uh, it's quite fascinating
to actually look at passports over the years
and how many things have changed.
Um, and, you know, it would be fair to say
that New Zealand is really, um, you know,
a world leader when it comes to security features.
Uh, many of the things that you probably couldn't see, um,
that are overt to you.
But there are things that, um,
customer officials across the world look at, um, the chip,
for example, uh, you know, that can be read, um, you know,
through throughout all sorts of, uh, international, uh, um,
arrivals, uh, et cetera.
They, they're very high strength when it comes
to security features.
So I think New Zealanders can be very proud, um,
of the passport that we supply to citizens.
Just a quick comment on the, back to the efficiency point.
Part of the book redevelopment,
we're looking at reducing the number of pages in the book
that they don't get used as much.
So there's not as much standing at borders,
particularly if you're traveling
between countries in Europe.
So actually a cost efficiency, which we can translate
through to then to, um, holding down the cost increases
for customers by reducing the number of pages in the book.
So we are constantly looking at what are the things
that can be done for both efficiency
and security in that book.
Thank you. Just a last one, uh, just in terms
of our ranking worldwide, have
We dropped or have we gone up?
No, we've gone up slightly, I think from the last, uh,
rankings that have come in.
So, you know, we, we perform very highly,
and as I said, it's a lot to do with the,
the security within the book.
Um, but also the, the ability to have, um,
the Visa free wavering, um, entry to so many countries.
So that's, there's both the security of the BLK
and also the Visa free entry.
And the Visa free. Free is not just simply the pockets,
also the relationships that New Zealand has
with other countries, which is more the preserve
of other departments, but security
of the bulk really informs that.
Thank you. Just a quick up on that.
You said that the government communicated to you
that English would need to go before TE Maori.
How was that communicated with you and by whom?
Um, we had a conversation with Minister Van Belden
that included around, uh, the brand of DIA,
so changed our brand.
So that's, um, now it's Department of General of Affairs
Tua, so flipped the order as well through that process,
including Britain briefings, the, our preference made clear.
Thank you, Tim. Um, thank you.
I noticed in, in your report you talk about the 25th
anniversary commemorations of the deployment
to East Timor or Timor Lester.
Um, what was the department's role with respect to that?
Yes. Um, I might invite Ha Lambert up to the table.
Hani, I think that is the visits and ceremonies, uh, office.
Um, and so, uh, it's an important function in the department
where, uh, um, often those commemorative events are led
by the Ministry of Cultural and Heritage in New Zealand
Defense Force, but we provide the administrative support
to those events, so VCO supporting, uh, the activities.
So, um, is there a particular question around that or
Just a general Oh, well, it was noted in your annual
report as one of your sort of highlights
for the year under the, uh, people's sense of belonging
and collective memories along with the Western Samoa, um,
citizenship legislation,
which obviously this comm committee has an interest in.
Yes. Um, and,
and as I understand, I think, are you just responsible
for coordinating the New Zealand aspects of that? Yes.
So Against that, do the offshore, is that,
That's right. So it's the visits
and ceremonies office VCO. Yes.
And this is the ceremonies part of that. Yes.
So you might want to make a few more
discussions on the role we play.
Yeah, I'd like to get some more detail
to the committee separately, if that's okay.
But the, the role of the team is to provide support
around national commemorative events, uh, that includes
and Z Day annually, uh, as well as, uh, supporting,
um, state funerals.
Um, and so the team provide that support,
uh, for domestic events.
You're right, in fact, do the work offshore.
Uh, but we very much work in partnership with themselves,
uh, and also with New Zealand police.
And I'm, I'm aware that there have been a number of,
uh, events.
We are sort of in the, what are we,
110 years now on from Anzac Day,
but in, in terms of some of the more recent ones, um, Tim
being the biggest deployment since the Korean War, I think
for New Zealand, one of the, the longest ones,
and the one where we've lost the most lives would be
Afghanistan, where we, 10 New Zealanders lost their life.
Um, and I'm, where it next year will be 25 years since
the first deployment to that.
So are, are there plans, uh, around Yeah,
Afghanistan deployment?
So the teamwork and partnership with the Ministry
of Culture and Heritage and, um, the work
around determining the content for events is very much, uh,
a across government, uh, effort.
Um, so even thinking about, um, upcoming recognition
of the signing of the Declaration of Independence, uh, the
Treaty of Wang in 2040.
Um, so the visits and Ceremonials team very much look
after, uh, event management.
Uh, whereas the types of events that might be invested in,
um, those decisions are taken across government.
So we really respond to the request from NZDF Ministry
of Cultural Heritage about here's the events program
for the year, and then we,
we are the events management organization, if you like. So
Thank you. And can I just
say thank you, the,
to the team that were involved?
I know a number of the veterans, there were a number
of events, uh, around Parliament
and around Wellington last year that, that I was part of.
And I know that was quite meaningful for a lot of people,
um, particularly that, like those
that lost a friend over there.
But, um, but I think for all people
and just to see that the difference it's made in the country
was, was, was really special.
Just while we are talking VCO,
can I just ask one last up on that? Yeah. We've
Just got the minister in one minute.
Okay. This will be a one minute question. We
Can, we can possibly pause and come back as well.
It'll be a one minute question, uh, slightly
outside the year in review.
But the other, um, big event maybe was, um, right,
honorable Jim Bulger's funeral.
Mm-hmm. That's what department play.
Um, just maybe give us a quick rundown of what,
what an event like that looks like for your team.
Yes. So, um, we've had sadly, um, passings
of governor's general, uh,
former Prime Minister over over the last few years.
Um, you know, we very much work with families, um,
to make sure that the contributions
that these important New Zealanders have made, uh, uh,
appropriately recognized, um, for some, uh,
like former governor General Ka Tizard, uh,
that involved quite a, a special niche event, uh,
that we ran in Auckland at the Altair Center.
Um, and, um, as you saw recently with former Prime Minister,
uh, Jim Bulger, it was a, a quiet event, uh, which, um,
the arrangements for which are really negotiated
with the family to understand how best they would like the,
the life of their loved one, uh, recognized,
albeit they've had a national impact.
So, um, it is part of our responsibility to provide, um,
operational support for the recognition of those passings.
Um, and, uh, the team, uh, we're very grateful for the way,
uh, the family, um, engaged,
and we were happy to provide the support required.
Thank you. Um, thank you very much for that.
And I'll just, uh, note me, I've,
I've still got the speaking order for our minister, um,
that has, uh, been with us.
Welcome minister, uh, back
to the Governance and Administration Committee.
We've got, um, 20 minutes with you today.
So I'll, I'll, I'll invite you
to make very brief opening comments if you can,
and then we'll turn to questions from members over to you.
That sounds great. Well, good morning everybody,
and it's great to see you all again.
Feels like it's been a, a short while,
but I'm sure it's been longer.
Um, I know that the committee is into its third year
together, so I expect you are very familiar, uh,
with the breadth of the department's operational functions.
Um, so I won't repeat those.
Um, but since becoming a Minister of Internal Affairs,
my focus for the Department of Internal Affairs
and its officials is ensuring
that it's delivering its services as efficiently
and effectively as possible.
And that means respecting taxpayers money, levy payers money
and treating it as if it were their own.
And I've made my intentions clear to the department
that they need to focus on delivering the essential tasks
that only the government can do.
And I understand that this is a continuous progress process,
but the department has been regularly reviewing the way it
delivers their functions
and services to ensure value for money for taxpayers.
Um, I'd like to thank the committee with the time I have
for the hard work that you're doing.
Uh, looking through a number of the bills
that have come from my department, uh, this year,
including the online casino gambling bill
and the regulatory systems amendment bill.
Um, I would also like to note that I expect
that the second phase of the COVID-19 inquiry, uh, to be,
uh, returned, uh, by the 26th of February.
And it is on budget and on track to deliver that report.
Um, and to close, I would just like to commend the passports
and citizenship, uh, processing teams.
Uh, when I came to office in November, 2023, uh, people
who were wanting, uh, passports, uh,
were having very long wait times.
I was appalled to hear
that the standard passport was taking 27 days
to get out the door, and a citizenship application was an
average of 180 days.
Um, I made it clear to the department
that I was focusing on fixing what mattered to the public,
and they needed to improve those wait times.
Uh, the passport wait time is now down
to three days from 27 days,
and the citizenship is now down
to 51 days from 180 days.
Um, I could tell you about all
of the different efficiencies.
Um, go for it. We do have limited time, so thank you.
Um, happy to take your questions. Thank you,
Laga. Well,
thanks minister. I really appreciate, uh,
your time this morning, uh,
and especially how you, um, I conduct efficiencies
and you, uh, wanting the department to work effectively.
But in terms of, um, fiscal challenges
that the department has faced, uh,
you've been very clear in terms of budget cuts.
Uh, we know that there's been risings costs, um,
updated fees, um, infrastructure that's aging,
and also probably lots more staff.
You've had, uh, we had earlier discussions
of the 12 million budget cuts.
Mm-hmm. Can you, um, provide us with your view in terms of
adequate funding that you have now been very clear
with the department in terms of cost cuts, budgets,
efficiencies, effective services.
Could you, um, unpack that for us in terms
of your commitment going forward?
Yes. So look, it, it's not a, uh, surprise
to anyone that these have been
difficult, uh, economic times.
Um, and as part of that, um, my job has been to look
through the department and,
and help set, uh, some efficiency standards, uh, for
how much money we would be spending
baseline, uh, year on year.
Um, I commend, um, our DIA, uh, secretary, uh,
for taking on that work.
And while I'm not directly responsible for, uh,
the specific areas where they have found efficiencies, um,
they have been finding efficiencies
and reducing that cost year on year, uh, which I think is,
uh, to be commended not just in DIA,
but across government, uh,
because we have to find those efficiencies
because that money directly is coming from New
Zealanders Zealand.
Um, the other area though, that sits outside, uh, of
taxpayer and direct crown funding is the cost recovery
for other parts of the department's services.
So, for example, uh, with passports, uh, we did, uh,
unfortunately, uh, need to put up the fees for passports.
Um, but that went up this year by 14%.
Uh, the department did ask for more, uh, funding, uh,
to ensure that it was cost neutral, uh, to the,
the service Over time.
I did, uh, reduce that down
and ask for a 30% efficiency saving, um,
through the passports, uh, office or life services.
Um, and they have, uh, accepted that there does need
to be efficiencies made so that, uh,
we are not just adding additional costs onto people asking
for a passport, uh,
but it can actually come
with responsibility from the department finding, uh,
some savings as well.
Thank you. Um, you've explained that when you came in
as minister, there's been quite the efficiencies in terms
of the turnaround processing in passports.
Mm-hmm. Uh, earlier we did hear, um,
from Paul in terms of the explanation as to
where the business units are reduction
and also to manage that with the budget cuts.
Can you, uh, provide to the committee in terms
of moving forward, um, where your expectation,
and then the department will have to meet you
because you've already outlined the department wanted this,
they wanted more, but you've said 30% savings.
Well, that has an impact not just on staff in terms
of budget cuts, but also the jobs that have been,
um mm-hmm. That have been done well
With. Yeah, look, I, I think
there's, uh,
two important distinctions to make here.
Uh, firstly we have the correct, uh, direct crown funding
aspect, uh, where we have found, uh,
reduction in FT across all of DIA, um,
that has been separate
because that, I think that's quite important
that there's been leadership from the top.
Uh, so those reductions, uh, have come from, uh,
consolidating different divisions within DIA, uh,
second stage has been then to consolidate, uh,
or find efficiencies in management structures, uh,
which is also really important across the department.
What is separate to that, again,
is the Life's Identity Service branch, uh, where a lot of
that is, uh, not actually paid for directly by taxpayer
or the government,
but is paid for by people directly buying a passport.
Um, the difficulty here is that we have what's called, um,
a memorandum account where there are year on year forecasts
of how much money needs to come in in order to pay for, uh,
the overall passport service delivery over a timeframe.
Um, because it does need to become cost recoverable
and cost neutral over time.
The difficulty is
because the passports, uh, have not increased in cost
to keep up with, um, the staffing numbers required, um,
as well as inflation adjustment, uh, that that part
of the department was moving into a deficit.
Uh, so we haven't seen the same sort of reductions in staff
as we would have across other parts of the department.
Um, but we are attempting to create some cost neutrality,
uh, because it was going into deficit.
And so if something hadn't been done, uh,
would be essentially needing a Crown loan into the future,
which I did not believe would be acceptable, it is one part
of the department that does actually need to be,
um, cost recoverable.
Thank you. Um, Celia,
Thank you. Um, thank
you for being willing to come and meet with us
and I'll answer our questions.
Um, I have,
and it might be a question that needs to be passed
to officials, but, um, I was looking at the, um,
annual report talking about
approved information sharing agreements,
and there seem to be two sorts.
There's one that is, um, just between DIA
and the registrar general,
which seems to make perfect sense.
But there's a much broader one, customer nominated services
that includes a CC.
And I know you're not really here to talk about a CC,
but, um, D-I-A-M-B, ministry of Education, MSD,
transport Agency and, and a number of other organizations.
And I would just like to know the security
of the information and the high level purpose
of the information.
'cause I'm always concerned about people's privacy.
Oh, I very much thank you for the question.
'cause I, I share that same concern.
Um, but I will pass to, um, all for this particular one.
Thank you. Yes. Um, ICE is, uh, an approved way
of securing, um, information exchange
between government agencies.
They require sign off by the privacy commissioner.
There is quite some process to go
through to get those confirmed.
Uh, the instances you talked about there,
if I just give you an example as to why we do that, uh,
you will a few times to time, not for a little while,
but seen stories in the media where an agency such
as I revenue, et cetera,
may find itself inadvertently sending
a letter, someone deceased.
So this is about information sharing so that, uh,
we can match, um, birth decent
and marriages information, uh, with customer information,
other agencies so that they're accurate in terms of
who they connect with and contact with. So
You're not asking them to do jury service
and they've just been buried.
That's entirely right.
So it's just enabling government departments to have access
to accurate information, ensure
that they're responding properly to members of the public.
So, and there's a series of those exchanges of information,
that's just one example,
but they're all aims at ensuring New Zealanders get their
entitlements access to services, uh,
effectively and responsibly.
Um, but they are signed off by the privacy
Commissioner and it was quite a process to put
Them in place. Thank you. That
summary reassuring. Did you have a sub?
Uh, yes. Just, uh, I do have a sub, uh, minister,
we spoke about passports in a previous report, uh,
and very willing to understand why the name,
the English name passports now is
before the, can you explain it to us?
Because we were advised that it was a ministerial direction.
Yes, that's right. Uh, so it is part of the coalition, uh,
agreement with New Zealand First National
and Act, uh, for English first.
Um, so you'll note that with Tua, uh,
this is now reverted to the Department of Internal Affairs
Tua, so that we have both languages with English first.
Um, but as an extension of that, one
of the most front facing parts
of the department is passport.
Um, and so an acknowledgement that, uh, most New Zealanders
who are dealing with the department wouldn't necessarily see
that English first carry through, um, without
actually seeing that document in their
hand with English first.
Uh, I made the decision based on the coalition agreement,
uh, to put English First
Minister. Do you, um,
how would, how, how does
that embrace diversity in, in your view?
Uh, because there's still two languages,
uh, on the document.
Um, but it's also ensuring that for most New Zealanders
who do speak English as their first language
or as their second or third language, uh,
that we're an accessible service.
Um, when I was, uh, campaigning
through the 2023 election,
and actually prior to that, I was hearing a lot
of people say that they felt, uh, frustrated
because they didn't feel like government was accessible
because they couldn't understand what service
or department they were attempting to contact.
I think in terms of what DIA does,
which is it essentially helps New Zealanders from birth all
the way through to death.
Having a department where you call up
and you know what department you have called up, uh,
because people speak English as their first, second,
or third language or more, um,
that I think makes it more accessible
to more New Zealanders.
It was also something I heard from ethnic communities, uh,
that because English was their second language
and they had limited Maori, that it was harder for them
to reach out
to government departments when there was Maori first
'cause they didn't understand
what department they're engaging with.
Thank you. So we had a few subs on
that. Celia. And then
Did you I'm not, I might, I'm
following up this specifically about the pastoral
and I, I have to say, I was delighted that I got my passport
that had ULT offers
because if ang when
that was when this country was established
as an independent country, what was the majority language?
What was the first language?
How has, um, the changes since,
how has that erased the role
of the first language that was spoken?
We haven't erased anything.
The passport still has two
languages on its front cover.
Um, personally, I'm, I'm just surprised that we're spending
so much time on a few words, on a cover
of a document rather than on efficiencies, uh,
and accessible service for government services
For an organization That's got over 2000 staff.
Um, we've got here, um,
Melissa, uh,
It's ministers actually, um, roughly, um,
answered the question that I was going to have.
Okay. One of the biggest issues that we've had, um,
recognition of New Zealand as a country was the fact
that people did not understand what Rtol was.
And there was always a question to me as a,
as a migrant who's actually been here for 37 years,
that people actually always ask,
why don't you have New Zealand that is recognizable
around the world when you're traveling?
And, you know, people sort of didn't get that.
Have you actually got that kind of response from,
from the communities as well?
Yeah, I have had response, uh, from the community, uh,
in a similar vein.
I mean, as much as we might be, um, delighted
by the idea that people are thinking
of us all the time, they're not.
We're a small Pacific island at the end of the world.
Um, and ensuring that people even understand
what New Zealand is, is a challenge, um, versus having, uh,
multiple names for the country.
I acknowledge though that this hasn't been a,
a major concern for me.
The main concern for me has been accessibility
to government services for all people
who come and make their home here.
Um, what is the most common language
for accessibility purposes?
Well, that would have to be, uh, English.
Um, but I, I would also just take the point
that this has not been a major decision in my term.
I would've said it was possibly one
of the quickest decisions Yeah.
I needed to make. Okay. Did you
Want just very, very quickly minister.
Um, and, and I just acknowledged that from Ms. Wade Brown,
that, that the order of them is obviously significant.
The, the constituents that came
to see me two years ago typically were complaining about not
being able to get one in time to travel somewhere,
maybe a funeral overseas or whatever it is.
So I acknowledge the changes in the names,
but what has been the impact?
Have you heard feedback on the impact of,
and I can't remember the exact date.
Was it 27 days down to three days?
Can you just tell us that for passport
Services? Yeah, absolutely.
So we, we've found, uh,
huge efficiency in the wait times, uh, through this term.
Uh, when I first became a minister, it was taking 27 days,
uh, for pe people on average to receive their passport.
That is now down to three days on average.
Uh, that's not three days for an urgent application,
which is three days.
This is three days for all passports.
Uh, so there's been huge reduction in wait time,
which will be massively beneficial for any family, uh,
who's planning on traveling overseas soon.
Um, but if I may, with the time I have, uh,
also ask any member of the public, if they're listening, uh,
if they're expecting for their 10 year renewal, uh,
to come up next year
to see if they could potentially get in early to help us,
um, flatten that curve of a spike
that we are expecting. That's
Two and a half years. The next one.
Yeah, that's, that,
That's a helpful, um, that applies to me.
So that's a helpful, um, public service announcement.
I've got three questions and I think
about the same number of minutes. So I'll go
To Tom. Yeah.
I wanna ask about Finns.
Obviously, it's, um, a very, uh, topical, uh,
matter at the moment publicly, uh, in particular around, uh,
seeing some firefighters walk, walk off the job.
Um, can you just talk us a little bit about
the situation at present please?
Yeah, so the situation at present, of course, uh, given
that fire and emergency is a crown entity.
And I'm not directly responsible for bargaining.
Um, uh, it's been over a year, uh, that fire
and Emergency has been working
with the professional firefighters union, uh, on bargaining.
Um, so I won't go into too much detail there.
Um, but where we have been looking is in finding
efficiencies in back office.
Yeah. Um, I know that it has been a frustration of
myself as well as members of the public
and our professional firefighters, uh,
that they have believed that there is, uh,
not enough efficiency within back office
and too much money going
to the back office rather than the frontline.
Uh, that is something that I've been attempting to change
through this term, uh, which is why I have asked
for foreign emergency to find $60 million of savings, uh,
over a three year band.
Um, and I also acknowledge though that the board has asked,
uh, for even more savings on top of that, uh, coming
to a savings regime of 150 million.
Uh, so 50 million per year, uh,
that will not be coming from frontline,
but it's to find efficiencies in that back office,
which we know has been a source of frustration.
Not for my, not just for myself,
but also, uh, for those professional firefighters.
And when do you expect that to sort of take place?
If the border asking to make those savings,
when would you expect to see that come to a resolution?
Uh, we are already seeing some
of those savings come through.
Uh, my officials from Fire
and Emergency tell me, they have found,
I believe 16 million so far.
Correct. Um,
and so that will start coming through, uh, as those uh,
savings programs come into place it sounds like
Paul's got some more info.
And, uh, there's a live change process
running at the moment.
We see them, uh, achieve around two thirds
to three quarters of those savings. Total minister
That supplement manga.
Thanks, minister. Um, really helpful to understand your,
um, instructions to fees,
um, with the cost savings.
And I appreciate that you've got, um, the role fees have
to do the operation part.
Just really interested in, um, Kerry Gregory's comments
around can't do everything for everybody.
What, what does that actually mean in terms
of your statutory role of things and the relationship?
Because we are having a lot of frustration on the ground,
uh, with professional firefighters,
and it's a concern around safety and equipment, et cetera.
So if I'm not mistaken, I think that that quote was coming
to do with watercraft, um,
in the Waikato as opposed to the direct fire service.
Um, and it has never been a responsibility for fire
and emergency to be responsible for the training of
volunteers or professional firefighters to use watercraft.
That is my understanding.
Um, and across the country, uh, other voluntary,
uh, or parts of fins, uh,
that have used watercraft in the past have
removed that function.
Um, and I believe it is fire
and emergency's understanding that
that should be better sitting, sitting with police, uh,
rather than fire and emergency.
So I think his, his comment needs to be taken in context,
but he is not saying we, we can't do everything
for all people within fire and emergency scope.
Um, but it's looking at where is it best place
to put watercraft, which is not a, a core component of fire,
emergency or it's, uh, equipment, uh, and property.
We, we are now, um, almost out time,
but I know Andy's got a question.
I dunno what it is. Um, if you wouldn't
mind minister, just one last question.
It's, it's also related to fence.
I just wanted to explore the philosophy behind
how the levies are allocated, uh,
because at the moment, of course they pay, the vast bulk
of it is paid by pro, by property owners.
Yeah. There's a large chunk of offenders activity,
even though they ascribe things like, um,
training, et cetera, or to fire.
Mm-hmm. A large chunk of it goes
to things like first responder
and the case of medical type events.
And yet that's being paid
for essentially by property owners.
My question would be is what's the philosophy behind that?
Are you thinking about whether it's actually fair,
especially if property owners start getting insurance too
expensive, we're out of there and, um, so,
and they partly get driven to that by
them picking up things which are
not actually property expenses.
So, interested in the philosophy.
Yeah, no, I, I totally agree with you.
Um, it is a strange arrangement, uh,
'cause it is paid for by a levy onto commercial
and private property.
Um, my understanding is
that under previous governments when there was the
amalgamation of the fire service from rural
and urban, um, it became fire and emergency New Zealand.
So it took up an emergency function as well.
However, at the time, under previous governments,
there was a review into whether
or not, um, there should be changes to how it is funded.
Um, my understanding is that previous governments decided
to then continue, uh, with it being funded through, uh,
levies on insurance rather than some wider
or different regime.
That was before my time as a minister.
My role since then has not been to do a massive overhaul
of the act, given that it's only been a few years since
that act was established.
Um, it has been to try
and put in place, uh, the practicality of the operation of
that levy from 2026 to 2029.
But I, I do acknowledge that it is possible
that in future years further review does need to occur as
to whether or not it is the most acceptable way of, uh,
finding money for the fire service.
Uh, given that 99% of it comes from levies.
Uh, and there is, you know, members of our public who,
who don't have insurance, who are also, um,
Finding, finding the benefit Yeah.
Of it as well. So it's not a perfect system,
but it is the one that we have.
Um, and it was given to us by previous governments.
Oh, I'm sure you can have a
look at it at some point in time.
Oh, I, I'm, I'm interested in, in some of the work,
but I'm also very cautious as well of, uh, suggesting
that I'd be, uh, committing to any particular change, given
that it was quite recently understand
that there was a review
where previous governments acknowledged that they
didn't believe there was a better way.
Thank you, minister. We have now, um, used our time.
You're obviously welcome to stay if you wish,
but we'll probably, um, if you, if you wish to, um,
leave now, thank you for your contribution to our hearing.
Thanks so much. Um, and see you next time
and we'll move back to our, uh, conversation, uh, with, um,
all James as CEO.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, Andy, I had you down
as the next, um, primary. Oh,
Right. Okay, good. Thank
you.
Um, look, my question is, is there's a whole,
there's a whole sense of, um, high level indicators,
outcome indicators, uh, that you measure.
Um, the number of people survey,
it's not a particularly large number,
so there's obviously gonna be some margins there,
which would be good to understand.
The one, one that's being flagged as as, um, going down
slightly, um, uh, is people's sense of purpose
and sort of, um, confidence in the identity, their identity,
identity as New Zealanders, all those sort of things.
Um, so I dunno whether it's a material difference or not,
but I wonder if you've gone behind that information to say,
well, if there is any downward trend, why?
Yes. I think as a committee I understand that, um,
j is such a diverse organization, it's hard
to find the right set of outcome.
It's great outcome Indicators. Indicators.
Um, so we've got 13 outcomes
and, uh, indicators that support those, which is sort
of a basket in a balanced set.
Um, very few of them are directly, solely the work
of the development internal affairs.
You, uh, many of them,
there will be multiple agencies contributing
in some way indeed.
But we still think it's important for us
to hold the discipline of actually having outcomes,
having indicators and tracking to them, uh, on that one,
I think, you know, would be speculative for me to start
to try to, uh, unpack what is the elements that are leading
to society, having that sense around identity.
So there's nothing sitting behind that.
It's just ask the question.
We, we look at what we are doing in terms of, in particular,
for example, national Library Archives
and the treasures we're holding the
accessibility we're providing to people.
We still think we're doing the right things.
Um, but there is a, an ongoing challenge about
how we make sure we connect
and engage people with, um, the treasures of the country
that we hold as part of that connecting an identity.
Okay.
Thank you, Celia? Yes.
Um, my questions,
I'll leave the local governments until later.
Um, the Carbon Neutral Government program, um,
which is, as I understand it ongoing,
but has been possibly de prioritized.
Um, could you talk, I, I've got the appendix here.
Could you talk a bit through, um, what your plans are given,
sort of did a lovely drop and then it settled,
and how you aim to get down to the,
whether the original target is still what you're aiming for,
um, what's going on other than just fewer people flying?
Uh, yes. So, um, we continue to have a program around
that in the department.
Uh, you're correct that one of the first areas
of focus was flights.
Um, and that was, uh, one way
that we had real impact was pulling back in
and out of, uh, travel.
Uh, new digital tools have made that easier.
It hasn't had a business impact, which has still been able
to connect, but in different ways we'll continue
to have a focus on travel is still a contributor
to our carbon emissions.
And so we'll continue to look to see
how we can drive down that as well.
But actually for us, a big area too is buildings.
So we have some large buildings
and some buildings with some quite specific requirements,
particularly national library archives.
And so we also have a program to look at
how we reduce the emissions outta those buildings.
For example, uh, swapping out, uh, light bulbs,
LED lighting, looking at the heating, uh,
the atmospheric conditions.
So got an ongoing program of work that looks
to reduce energy consumption
and looks to reduce emissions as a result.
So on track their targets, uh,
continuing program of work around that.
That's, that's good. And I have a completely
different area of question.
Uh, yeah. Okay. Well, shall we go
to Melissa and then we'll come back to you? Thank
You. Uh, thank you.
Um, Madam Chair. Um, thank you for your work.
I, I know it's actually Complic complex
and you know, so many things to worry about.
I'm actually interested in the performance measures
and specifically re gambling on page 70
of your annual report, which talks about the percentage
of audited gambling providers that are compliant by a year,
and it's 50%, uh, instead
of the standard 85%.
And you've got a note there saying that there were, um,
substantial amount of non-compliant, um,
class four operators.
Could you actually elaborate on that?
We've had quite an internal discussion around
that measure, so very happy to speak about it.
Uh, it is an important indicator
because we want venues to be compliant.
Um, we recognize that we are, uh,
some way off achieving that indicator.
Uh, but for us, uh, it is, uh,
the thing we're stressing is it's important
to stay focused on it, uh,
and to work with the venues to make sure
that they understand what is required to be compliant.
They've got plans in place to lift compliance.
And so, um, the trend line is up in that indicator.
Um, but rather than changing the indicator,
we wanna see ourselves a very tough target
and keep working towards it.
So that is, uh, so we acknowledge that stands out
as an indicator where we are somewhere off achieving,
but, um, we're gonna stick, if you like, in a point
of discomfort around that because we think it's important
target for us and
to keep working it over the next few years.
So together with that, the percentage of venues assessed
as compliant by year is also very low at 48%.
Mm-hmm. So that is obviously related. Yes.
Is it a case of you not being able to complete the work
or in the, in terms of the numbers
that you've actually had targets or, um, is it
because the, the assessment is actually taking
longer and more complex
There? There's a range of
contributing factors,
and it's all of the things that you mentioned.
So there are numbers of, uh, this, of audits
and inspections we conduct, but also
what we're finding in terms of compliance that's
Contributing. Um, so in note
one, it actually talks about, uh, the need
for legislative reform in regards to the class four.
So, uh, is it in process
or is it actually connected to the online gambling ledge
that we've just, um, worked on?
Um, so I don't think we're planning to do that indicator
around this reform,
but, um, with any regulatory regime, there's always a need
to constantly update and including the regulatory
stewardship amendment bill
that's currently in front of this committee.
There are things that update
that regulatory regime in there, uh, as well.
Uh, sorry, third sub on that.
Um, the percentage of societies
and clubs that are distributing their requirement return,
um, required returns by year is at 74%,
95% was the, uh, standard.
And it looks like, um, there were people
or organizations that weren't actually distributing
to the community as stipulated
and required by their licenses.
Could you elaborate on that?
Yes. So, um, I'll make a start
and I'll hand out the Deputy Secretary
Regulatory and Identity Services.
Um, Rachel, that's an important part of the, the, um,
the legislative setup for class four gambling is return
to community, uh, that is different to some other forms
of gambling in the country.
And so we have, um, uh, that goal of return
to community for the societies.
Um, we know it's tough for them to reach the required level,
um, but we want to, again, hold that
as the expectation of the required level.
So you identified three quarters do return the required
level, so that's positive.
Uh, but there's a quarter that, uh,
under close regulatory scrutiny from us.
So make sure there might be
a few more comments you'd like to make.
Paul, um, A factor, uh, presently that, um,
sort of is why that that is lower than what was forecast is
that a number of smaller clubs
and clubs that are operating are under financial pressure.
So obviously, um, part of the, uh, return pays for some
of their operating costs.
And so we've worked closely, um, with these, uh,
institutions to ensure that, um,
they are still viable in order to actually make the returns.
Um, so in some cases, actually we've, uh, worked with, uh,
with these clubs and clubs, um, to ensure
that actually there's probably no need for them
to have a license because they're not
able to meet the returns.
So I think it is a, you know, a cost of living, uh,
situation where, uh, some areas are becoming less viable.
So, um, they haven't been able to, you know,
they've been able to meet their own costs,
but they haven't been able to make the community returns.
So therefore that suggests that, uh,
patrons are not coming at the,
at the frequency that they would require.
And so the department's working with those institutions
to ensure, um, that actually are they actually viable
for the, to retain the license.
So, so if you're saying that if they're not able to
meet the, the businesses are actually not viable,
but the returns to communities actually just based on the
gambling, um, money,
But they, they take a portion to,
to cover their overheads.
Yes, I know. First, yes.
So if they're not, uh, so that would come first
and then the returns would come after.
Right. But it's always a percentage.
It is a percentage, but the fact is that,
that some places are sort of really struggling,
and so they're not actually able to sort of cover the,
cover their costs that they have to run their operations.
So the agreement is that they, they give 40%
of their take, um, to the community,
but they actually cover, use that money
to actually cover their costs. Well,
What, what it is suggesting is that their patrons is
so low that they're not able to,
to cover the costs to operate. Yes.
Right. Okay. Have you had any complaints about operate
class four operators who are, uh, sorry, I'll rephrase that.
Have you investigated, um, some, um, class four operators
who actually use pokies as, um, uh, in terms of corruption?
Like, um, I, I have heard stories
where people are paying their friends, people are actually,
um, siphoning money, uh, for their own purposes. Yeah.
We take those, um, allegations very seriously.
And we have a number of investigations.
We have a specialist gambling investigations team, uh,
that undertakes very complex, as you can imagine, um, uh,
investigations to find the evidence.
Um, and then we were look to prosecute. Absolutely.
Have you had any prosecutions or investigations? We have.
We have had prosecutions, and I
can't disclose those obviously.
No. Presently, but yes. Yes, we have. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay. I've got a quicks from Laga on that,
and then we'll go to Celia.
Thanks, GIA. Uh, just in terms of your work, just on
that scenario, mm.
Is there, um, any discussion with
community organizations such as problem gambling foundation
who are very focused on gamblers,
but they have a community that they communicate
with quite regularly?
Is there any sort of work that, um, does
with organizations such as bg?
Yes. Yeah, We, we work with 'em regularly.
And I think the legislative framing, I think
as the committee will know, the focus is integrity
of the gambling system, harm, preventing
and reducing harm from gambling,
and then return to community.
And so we've had the question around community,
but there is a focus on harm.
We engage regularly with the
problem gambling foundation as well.
Okay. Just a quick sub up.
Um, do you see the younger New Zealanders sort
of growing percentage around gambling
and the harm minimization?
Just interested in that.
I think, uh, what we see in particular is, uh, growth
of online, uh, casino gambling.
Um, and that's one of the reasons
for the government promoting the bill at the moment.
At the moment, there's no legality
or framework around that at all.
And that is where lots of the growth,
particularly for young people is.
So we think it's really important
to put in place some sort of regulatory regime.
Uh, we do work on gambling foundation,
and they are constantly pulling together data about, um,
I guess if you like gambling behavior and class for as well.
Our primary focus is the venues and the operators.
That's who we regulate.
Um, and the health system works more with yes.
Uh, those affected by gambling. Thank
You for your comments.
Yeah. So what would the impact be if there was,
if the bill, whatever the, you know,
imperfections may be in terms of first Bill,
if there was nothing done in the online casino gambling
space, what would the impact be?
So, um, that is what's deeply concerning
for the department is at the moment we don't have regulatory
tools in respect of online casino gambling, really.
And so, uh, if that bill doesn't advance,
then we are left without, uh, the ability to regulate.
Is there any ability to collect money for
gambling harm without,
No, that just takes, That is is it creating any
harm in our community that you
Yes, it will be, um, all gambling.
Most people who gamble do so safely,
but there is a minority that, uh, affected negatively,
sometimes terribly by gambling.
And so with that online gambling
that will be happening at the moment,
there's no contribution to problem gambling. So
The department's view is we have to do something.
Yes. So, just so on that, um,
At the moment, there seems
to be relatively stringent requirements
to prevent advertising by online gambling.
Correct. Um, and once this bill passes,
that will no longer be the case
because advertising will be permitted as, as they are able
to advertise as a, a legal regulated, um, entity.
So do you expect that there will be an increase in
advertising as a result of this change? I
Think there's two parts to the response.
The first is we'll continue to, uh,
online gambling will be much more clearly illegal
and advertising will be illegal once, um,
the Legisl has passed, unless you have a license.
So for the, the group that have a license,
they will be permitted, uh, to advertise,
but that will be tightly regulated.
So there will be rules, uh, that they'll have to follow.
And because we'll have a legal relationship with them
through the license, we have much more confidence
that we can enforce then those, uh,
advertising standards and rules.
And for those who don't have a license,
that will continue to be illegal.
But the, the number of licenses that have been selected,
as I understand, is reflective
of the current activity within
the online gambling space at the moment.
So it's likely that most, at least initially
of the online gambling Correct.
Will be legal? Correct.
And they'll be able to advertise. Yes.
Yeah. Thank you. But there will be specific rules about
their advertising, which there currently isn't.
Well, there is rules about ing in the sense
that it's illegal, so there'll be restrictions.
Yes. Um, Celia, you had a primary,
Sorry, Can I, sorry, just one,
but one thing in that space I'm really concerned about is
community funding and money going back
like it does with class four.
Uh, will there be, under the current bill,
will there be money going back?
'cause I've, I've heard from a lot of our local sports
clubs, culture groups that, that rely on that funding.
Will there be funding for that?
So I think our, our starting point in the policy work had
been to replicate the terrestrial
or land-based casino system,
which doesn't have an explicit return to community.
Uh, so the gambling commission has put in a,
a small obligation on Sky City, for example,
but it's not in the statute.
Um, however, there is clearly, um,
a live debate publicly about return to community.
Uh, it's made of consideration of this committee,
and I know that ministers
and cabinet are actively considering as well. So,
Okay. Thanks
Celia. Thank you.
Completely different area.
Um, the Alexander Turnbull library.
There's quite a lot in the report about the collections
and how it's been managed through the move,
but excuse me if I've just missed it,
but how is building project going,
or is that somebody else's responsibility?
Somebody else's responsibility? That's Po Tonga Heritage
New Zealand, sorry.
Heritage Po Tonga, heritage New Zealand.
Okay. Okay. But you are responsible
for the collections within it?
Yeah. So legally there's a distinction, if you like,
between the building and, uh, between the library,
which is part of the national library.
Whereas for archives, you are responsible both
for the building and for what's in it.
Correct. It just so happens a building associated
Yeah, that's fine. That explains
why it's part of it there.
The collections outgrew the building as much
as anything too, so it's a very
important part of National Library.
Thank you. I look and I look forward to the, um,
archives building tour at some
Point. Mm.
Be happy to organize for
the committee if they would like. Yes, please.
Sounds like a good idea. Andy had a, yeah.
Look, um, my question's a local question,
but it's not a local government question per se.
Um, you've got in your, in your, well,
in your annual report, you've got,
we supported West Westport's program of flood resilience
with five initiatives completed
and remaining initiatives underway.
So I'm interested in what the role the department was, how
that interfaces with full district council
and the Westport Regional Council,
and, um, also with any other government agencies.
And also thinking about the department's,
thinking about protecting what's there as opposed to moving
the community or large part of community
to place be safe for longer term.
So that longer term planning component as well, that
Absolutely one invite between Casey's the deputy secretary
for local government to join me up here,
but, um, obviously there was some terrible flooding
and around Bull River, around that community.
Um, and look, the lead responsibilities, of course,
with the council, both the, uh, territorial authority
and regional council, however, government has stepped in
and has provided funding
and support, uh, for a program of work.
Um, we hold that funding on behalf of government. Do you
Hold 20 something million dollars? That,
That's correct. And so we
work and facilitate it with the councils
as they're doing their planning, but we have a coordination
role across other government agencies
who are involved in network as well,
and also work with nco, um, through,
uh, contributing to that type.
Uh, but I can, we can talk to
that in a bit more detail if you'd like.
Uh, a little bit more would be great. Yeah.
We might have to come back to you on all the detail, but
We, I've got the detail. Sorry.
We, we are currently working through with, um, NCO though
for them to take over a large portion of our responsibility
for managing the funding
and the program, um, which is really about them supporting,
uh, the councils to be able to deliver.
Yeah. I'm also small councils
Tracking. I, I'm very well aware
of it being beyond their means,
but I'm also very interested in the whole process of future
resilience and whether that's on the existing site Yeah.
Or some of it not on the existing
Site. And those are decisions
that the councils will make more
than central government, but they need to be made.
And it's really our role to support, facilitate that,
but be very happy to provide a written brief
and a bit more detail around that.
That'd be cool. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you, Lamon.
Um, please share, sorry, just in terms of some
of the roles that have been cut, uh, just establishments
of the government chief privacy officer,
but also the digital team, given
that we are headed into digital, can you just explain, um,
the, what the department is doing around those specific,
um, pieces of work?
Yes. So in respect
to the government chief Privacy officer,
that role had been in place for around a decade.
Um, its primary role, uh, was a,
a privacy maturity assessment framework
and support the privacy officers, uh, across departments.
Um, but, uh, with, um, changing digital landscapes,
what we could see was a need to actually, um,
work in other different areas, in particular ai.
So the decision was made to close that role.
Um, didn't think that there, um, was as much of a need.
There was much more mature privacy practices
across government agencies.
We were seeing that and the evidence
that came through from that assessment.
Whereas, um, AI was a real area of need in terms
of building out the frameworks,
the guidance or the supports.
So essentially we closed down that function
and repurposed the money towards a focus on ai.
Um, so that is that area.
Um, the other digital area that you might be referring to is
that, again, we've made some changes to some of staffing
around some of the digital regulatory functions.
And in particular, we have combined, uh, two teams
that were separate previously, one around, uh,
digital messaging, so, uh, spam and scams
and the other around countering violent extremism.
But there were two relatively small teams of four people.
So each, uh, with two separate managers,
it's now one large team with one manager.
That's an example of what minister was talking about before.
So we've made changes in management
and leadership structures, uh, to save, uh,
essentially make savings in order to fund cost pressures.
And, and just just to supple on that, in terms
of the efficiency.
So obviously the work is becoming more, um, sophisticated
specifically from overseas.
Do you feel that, in terms
of the department's role specifically around monitoring, uh,
is that going to be beefed out in terms
of the next few years, given that online gambling online?
Pretty much many things.
Are we, uh, are the staff going to be resourced,
well resourced in that area
and the sophistication of those issues?
Yes. Uh, um, provide an answer in two parts.
The first is that some of those, uh,
digital regulatory functions for us are pretty mature,
particularly in the child sexual abuse area.
Quite relatively big teams, very capable.
And essentially, you can never stand still in that area.
Uh, 'cause the people who are committing harm
crimes never stand still.
So we are constantly evolving our practice,
building out new technologies and new capabilities,
and we have a great reputation domestically
and internationally around our capabilities to do that.
Some of the other regulatory roles are newer,
and that includes online casino gambling
if that legislation has passed.
So you start to see department will be building up a bigger
base of regulatory roles that have a focus on digital,
that includes digital identity actually as well.
So, and I think, um, that is also some
of the changes we've made in the organization where, uh,
we've connected all the regulatory roles in one branch, uh,
and connected them to also the identity services roles
with SIT and Rachel's area, so that some
of the underpinning capabilities around data, uh,
et cetera, can be pulled together.
So we used to have two data teams.
There's now the one data team just means
that we've created a better scale, better opportunities,
great capability and sophistication we think and support.
So that is the strategy that we've been pursuing.
Right. Um, we are now scheduled for a break.
We'll come back at 10 past 10 with the digital. Um,
uh, we are now, uh, going
to discuss the digital executive board for the next, um,
20 minutes.
I know, 30 minutes. Uh, so we'll, uh, start with that.
And then if we've got any additional matters, um,
after that's finished, we can, we can move on to that.
So I'll start, um, do you wanna make any
opening comments at all
On, I might briefly, if that's okay. Share.
So thank you. Absolutely.
Um, so I'm joining the table by Miles Ward,
who's the deputy Government Chief Digital Officer,
the Deputy SEC responsible for that area of, uh, department.
Um, very pleased to be here as part
of the digital executive board, which I chair,
I have chaired for the last couple of years.
It is, um, executive board, uh,
under the Public Services Act
that brings together system leads.
So that includes the government chief information security
officer, the government, uh, chief data steward,
and also the Public Service Commission itself.
Um, chair, uh, I wouldn't mind just observing that the main
and real primary focus of
that board is the service modernization roadmap.
However, it is not a very, uh, active, uh, board.
Uh, we find ourselves probably not meeting that often,
or with a little bit less to do than we thought.
And so we are currently thoughtful about whether
that's a bit of governance, architecture
that's done become surplus really, to the efforts
of digitizing government.
So I'm very happy to talk a bit about the work,
but very happy if you just wanna go broader
to actually the digitizing government
responsibilities we have more generally.
And I'll leave it there.
I'm happy to respond to your questions. Thank
You so much, uh, Ruben.
Thank you. Um, we, to start,
uh, I guess probably the first question for me is, um,
how you're progressing on that against version one
of the service modernization roadmap
that was issued in December last year.
So just how that's progressing broadly.
Yes. Um, so, uh, we've just, uh,
released version two is on 10th November.
It went live. So feel like we've, uh, put version one down
and turned to version two.
Uh, the roadmap itself is not, was never planned
for everything on it to be done
within an involvement period.
It's a rolling in three year window.
So, um, I think, uh, around a quarter all finishes
with completed, uh, which is what we expected broadly.
Um, most of them are still in flight.
The number of them have been carried over
to the second version as well.
But there's been an updating and,
and second version as well.
And we expected that we would mature that process.
We still think there's real value in this as a point
with a public service could come together.
And what are we trying to do quite practically in terms
of digital for the public?
So do you think there's a risk that the,
that the government's moving faster than the public
service can keep pace with?
That's not the, um, uh, feedback we get from the public.
Um, I, I think, uh, there will always be public who wish
to access services in a range of ways.
We talk about omni-channel, so they can still, if they wish
to face-to-face, et cetera.
Uh, but what we hear more is a continued appetite from the
public to see, uh, services continue to be modernized,
updated as technology evolves.
A lot of the, um, roles directly involved in,
in this space, in this area could be categorized as backroom
because they aren't front facing.
Have the, I mean, in in, in the last couple
of years we've seen a lot of those backroom roles disappear
or, or, or be deprioritized.
What impact has that had across public service?
That's a really good question.
So there has been an increase in the number
of ICT professionals in the public service.
So the most recent census conducted
by the public services round workforce identify that.
So that's partnering.
I think most agencies now understand digital is really
intricately involved in their service delivery,
and so needs to continue to be invested in truth.
If I give you an example of my own agency, department
of Internal Affairs, it's been very interesting.
So we have had to make some savings in,
in our own ICT, et cetera.
So we have seen changes which have reduced the numbers
management roles and brought things together.
But we have increased the numbers of roles as well.
And the reason we've done that is we've insourced So we're
now delivering more ourselves rather than,
uh, contracting out to vendors.
And so interestingly, we're saving money
by doing things ourselves rather
than contracting out to vendors.
And that's resulted in a growth in workforce.
So would you say that there's more backroom roles
in the public service now? I,
I try to avoid using the term back room, to be honest.
So, um, uh, um, so certainly for our organization in terms
of ICT, we have more staff void now in ICT than we used to.
And across the public services census identifies more ICT
professionals, but that is quite a broad
sweep of roles picked up.
Yeah.
Celia, Um, thank you.
And, uh, interesting times, kind
of swiftly do something changing.
Um, I wanted to know if over the past year
and point me to it, if I've missed it.
Um, any work that's been done on the continuing issues
of digital inclusion, um, whether you've worked with the cs,
they've got a big, um, campaign for digital inclusion
and where you see which part of government,
if it is government's role, um, do you see as leading,
um, that help for citizens, including
but not limited to people who might be blind
or might have, um, other disabilities,
but just generally people who've are uncomfortable?
Yes. Uh, look, I'll, I'll make a start
and then Miles might have some comments to make too.
So I think as we've talked about this committee
before, our role, my role is focused on digital.
Uh, and so the delivery of services
by agencies is the accountability of the chief executive.
So those chief executives are responsible
for ensuring their services delivered.
They'll make choices about the channels, whether
that's digital in person, et cetera.
Our focus is digital, but actually we have a strong focus on
inclusivity within digital.
So digital itself needs to be accessible.
Um, and there are a whole lot of things we do around that.
But for example, um, we have, uh, a
common web accessibility checker.
So it's a tool that we've built,
which I think the community would be aware of, uh,
that runs across websites
and identifies whether that website meets the
accessibility stands or not.
Just start, publish data around
that from government websites.
Is that available? Yes, it, the general public. Yes.
It's on our website digital.gov nz. Thank you.
It's a really good capability
and the Australians are looking to borrow it.
Um, they're very, I think it's quite nifty.
So, so just give that as an example of
where we are thinking about accessibility in digital.
And so our role really to make digital itself accessible.
Well, I don't think there's any other examples
or observations you'd make.
Uh, yeah, sure. I think, uh, if we look at,
as we start digitizing more
and more, we, uh, just need to get a, uh, have the standards
adapting to things above a website.
Uh, what we are looking at is around accessibility standards
for native mobile apps and non week documents, such as word.
Um, so we are using the key standard.
Uh, it's a new standard that's going to be coming out
around June, July.
Uh, we'll be, uh, then conducting, um, some,
um, collaboration, uh, just to make sure that
as we rewrite our standard, uh, that we have, uh,
the right inputs in there.
Um, there's a number of parties
that will be contributing to that.
Uh, but that's, um, government's movement to make sure
that accessibility just goes beyond the website,
but also goes into, um, mobile apps, uh,
and also documentation,
Um, including presumably emails
and yes, a whole range of
A, a whole range of things.
And who do you engage with outside government to
make sure that you are, um, up to date with that
and that you are giving general public that confidence?
And, and again, I just, I just see the CAB, um, collective
as one of the leading lights in that.
Yeah. So, um, we have begun drafting the digital
accessibility standard.
Um, and we have followed that with initial exploration
with disabled peoples organizations, uh,
and service providers
and disabled people with firsthand experience of interacting
with government digital services.
So we are making sure that we are canvassing wide
Work closely with, uh, we work closely with Phi Kaha
and they're helping us access those communities, et cetera.
So, uh, we have conversations from CAB from time to time.
I think their perspectives a bit more about
ensuring these channels as well as digital.
As I said, our mandate focus is to make sure
that digital is ex, um, accessible.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, yes, just some Thank you.
Um, chair, some subs really on
that accessibility topic, same thing.
Um, I mean, done with, anyway,
you've talked about engagement with disabled peoples and,
and through, but there are a bunch of New Zealanders
and sectors of our community
who maybe don't have smartphones or computers or,
or regular internet access.
What are you doing to ensure that they still have equity
of access to the services of government?
Yeah. Uh, look, again, I just stress
that our starting point is, uh, equity of access
to services is the responsible
of individual chief executives who are responsible
for discharging these services.
So, uh, secretary of health, uh,
or chair of, uh, sea of Health New Zealand is responsible
for thinking about access to health services.
Our responsibility is where services are digital,
how do we make sure they're accessible?
But your points still relate absolutely to our work as well.
So we have to think about how do we make sure
that we are device agnostic?
And Miles has talked about both web and app.
Uh, we work with agencies
around zero rated data for some services.
So that means that if people are, aren't, don't able
to access data on their phones
so they can still access the services, uh,
for some organizations,
and we talk with envy about connectivity, so
that's their responsibilities,
but connectivity is still an issue for some New Zealanders
and some parts of the country as well.
So do you have a sense of, um, any specific communities
that have lower levels of access
or no access to those digital services?
Yeah, our research, uh,
and the insight we've got from service and customers
before is that, um, if people, uh,
face accessibility challenges outside of digital,
they face those in digital too.
So if I just explain
that it'll expand that a little bit more.
We've talked about, uh, people with disabilities,
they often face, uh,
access challenges in terrestrial services, uh, already,
or people with learning difficulties or language barriers.
So digital, uh, fa you know, reflects
or faces those same barriers.
So we see real parallels with other points of, uh,
access challenge playing in through to digital,
but that's why accessibility
of digital becomes very important for us.
Sure. So some specific examples I guess I see at an
electoral level would be potentially high, high needs users.
So for example, an old age pensioner
who doesn't have a smartphone.
What are we, what are we doing
or what are you doing to ensure that they would still have
ability to access the services they need?
Yeah, so look, I use the example of the old age pension.
I'm at risk of talking about someone
else's responsibilities here.
But MSD for example, you know, it's their, uh,
who administers, uh, New Zealand super,
it's their responsibility to deliver New Zealand super
and to be thinking about those customers.
But, uh, I know, uh, from our own work with MSD,
they use identity check, um, which is a service
that DIA provides in terms of identity proofing
for digital and online.
There's very high uptake
amongst people accessing New Zealand super
for identity checks.
So we can see evidence
and data that, uh, uh,
people accessing New Zealand super are many, many,
if not mostly doing so digitally new, those digital tools
for that challenge of someone who might not have a, a phone
or might not want to access digitally,
that really is a responsibility of SD.
Sure. Do you have any sense of
what those numbers look like
or percentages of people who don't have that access?
Not for Ms D services
or not broadly across all of government?
No. So I, I can talk about DIA services.
So for example, we've talked about
passports, uh, this morning.
So over 90% of access
to our identity services passport
business marriages is now digital.
So it's very high digital access.
It's the vast majority of people,
but there are still some people
who aren't accessing digitally.
So we have digital assist where we can help people
through digital channels,
but people can also, uh, engage in face-to-face services
and account as on a basis.
So that's how the department, we've approached that.
So if that's 10% of the population, arguably give
or take that don't have access,
do you have any more granular breakdown within that as
to why those people don't like what the drivers
of them either electing to not have access
or not being able to have viable access to those services?
I think it's probably better if I came back to the company
with details around that.
But I think, uh, you know, following the flow,
this conversation, sometimes it's a choice or a preference.
Sometimes there are barriers, uh, to people as well, whether
that's technology or we talk about the mass model,
motivation, access skills, trust, those are sorts
of barriers to digital access as well.
So we do have a finer, greater detail.
I just don't have that to hand. So come back can
Cool. Thank you. Thank
you. That
Will be great. Um, I've gotta set
From Andy. Yeah.
Just on, on two, two elements of, um, uh, sort of digital,
um, digital engagement.
One of them is, is people's ability.
So as we, as we increasingly digitize, there are some people
who actually don't want digital.
Um, what would like to have that, you know,
use the hard copy property identification document,
the passport driver's license, whatever, um, that
that will still be provided for,
and people will still be able to use that regardless.
So good at getting that.
'cause it's important to many people.
The second part of it's we often hear in the skin is that
that inclusion bit is that people actually do not have, um,
either a passport, maybe can't afford it, don't need one,
and obviously it's, it's not a cheap thing to get
or cannot drive.
Mm-hmm. If you don't have those two, then you start getting
to what is my, what is my way of identifying myself
to get involved in any system?
Yeah. Uh, is quite difficult for a lot of people.
Um, so has any thought being
most people ba at ID cards per se, um, as a,
as a national concept, or many people would.
Um, but do we have some other mechanism
that government is thinking about to look after?
If if it's 10%, it's still 10%, whatever
that number might be, those people
who actually need some form of id,
but it's not a passport,
it's not a driver's license, essentially.
Government backed one.
That's a great question.
Um, and so, uh, we are part of a small number of countries
that don't have a national identity system. I'm not
Arguing for it. Westminster
style democracies are characterized by that.
Um, we met, um, on Monday this week
with a delegation from the Netherlands,
are out here, are looking at digital.
They have an ID system. They just digitized it.
That's what the vast majority
of companies in the world are doing.
That's not what we are doing.
So, uh, we are, uh, we have real ident uh, verified identity
so people can, uh, create, uh, a verified identity.
They can choose to do that now. And there's ways to do that.
It has driven off passports and, um, driver's licenses,
but there are other ways to create it.
That's, that's the issue. Okay. So,
Um, but I'd also, uh, uh, identify, uh, for you that,
again, our focus is digital and digital identity.
Um, our focus is on creating an ecosystem
and, uh, the trust and clear rules
and security provisions around that.
And then, uh, enabling a whole range of things
to flourish around digital identity.
And one of those would be an organization called My Mahi,
um, uh, who are in the business of creating digital identity
or young people who don't have other forms of identity.
Uh, hospitality New Zealand. You remember the pub's card?
Yes. So different branding now,
Not much good if you're not in the pub either.
No. But again, that's a form of identity for people
who might not otherwise have identity for young people,
might not have a passport or driver's license.
And so those organizations are looking at
how they might also move into creating a digital version of
that and be accredited under the digital
identity trust framework that we,
I'm, I'm really interested 'cause
we had, we had a journey.
We had a driver's license, um, um,
submission process the other day,
uh, transport and infrastructure.
And we had a very impassioned, a very sort
of heartrending sort of situation
of a young person with disability.
None of those identification systems are working for them.
And that's, that's a real problem. Yeah.
So how do we help those people?
Is my, is what I really wanna do.
Make sure if you've got a pathway for that.
Yeah, I'm really keen to actually,
if you've got further
information, I'd be really keen to see that.
Um, and how we can make that easy as opposed to hard.
'cause often those are the people who it's hard for anyway.
Make it hard to get through. That process doesn't help.
Yes. Look again, just make a few observations,
but this might be near where we could come back
to the committee with as well.
But I think, um, for the Department of Internal Affairs,
it is a really interesting role we have where, uh, our core
of our role is, um, registering births, marriages and deaths
and registering passports.
Um, and those are particular points of people's lives.
And really just for a range of reasons over time,
the ability to prove you are who you say you are
has just become part of life.
And those, that's the issue.
So passports are now used to prove you are who say you are.
It's not necessarily how it's designed other than travel
points and onboarding, but it's used by.
So move into digital identity
and digitizing those sorts of tools.
Uh, you start to see it becoming more ubiquitous, need
to be used by people all the time.
And people who don't have passport,
how do they get a digital identity?
We have got pathways we all need verifying others.
Uh, but I think you're right, there is a genuine issue about
how do we keep creating pathways
or opportunities for people
to construct digital identity in different ways.
So I'm very keen to get back.
Yeah. Thank you. Yeah. So I've gotta start from Reen
then a sub from Melissa.
Thank you. Um, on, on that topic of digital identity,
and we can see there's varying levels of interest
or appetite for it.
What work are you doing to, um, I guess
educate the public about exactly what digital Id can do?
What what we do see is the vast, vast majority
of New Zealanders would prefer to access service digitally
and are, and are starting to do so.
So, uh, we recognize that there are people who can't
or don't, but if I just speak about the majority
who are referring to access things digitally,
digital identity will become even more important.
We think, uh, the best way to, um, build awareness,
knowledge, and trust is by actually
by the services themselves.
So it's by people accessing a service
and using digital identity to do so.
That's the evidence of data we have, is that's
how people build trust
and the knowledge by actually
doing something they need to do.
Um, that's, they don't wanna interact
with government other than when they need
to, to achieve something.
And that's that point where there's a real opportunity to
encourage or grow people's
awareness around digital identity.
Uh, you'll be aware of Mr. Collins has announced the, uh,
delivery and of an all government app.
Part of that will be a wallet, uh, a digital wallet,
so much like the wallet on your Apple
or Android phone, your government wallet.
And that will enable digital identity credentials
to be held in that wallet on that phone.
So that will be a way that New Zealanders will start to see
what digital identity is and how it operates.
So when we get to a digital driver's license at some point
that could be held in that wallet.
I think that's the way people would be educated.
Our real focus is to make sure that there's trust, uh,
because this will only work if people
have trust and confidence.
That's why we started with legislation, with rules,
with a regulatory framework.
While these services will need to be accredited, uh,
otherwise they won't be able
to operate in that government wallet.
Um, and that people will build their trust though
by the service working and it being secure
and a positive experience.
So are you monitoring both usage and, and the increase
or decrease in usage?
And also are you doing any, any
research into the trust of that specific service?
Yes. Um, so I think of first value questions,
would we be monitoring usage?
Um, and, but we will not be monitoring usage.
We think it's quite important that we don't track,
uh, people.
Um, uh, uh, framing is decentralized, so it sits
with people they choose to use it or not.
Uh, and, um, government is not monitoring, uh,
as a whole the access of services by,
by New Zealanders in that way. So,
So you can't tell me that there's an increase in use
or a decrease, like static increasing, rapidly increasing.
You have no sense of that.
Well, in terms of access,
for example, I use example, the passwords.
We know whether people are accessing digitally
or not and how they're doing that.
But when the app
and the wallet are in place, people using
that digital identity credential on the wallet,
we will not be tracking how often that's used
in the same way that we don't track now whether, um, uh,
new Zealanders present a passport
or driver's license when they prove they're over
18 to buy wine in the supermarket.
We, we don't track that.
So why would we track that digitally in the wallet?
That's critical that we don't track it as our view.
Um, I think second part of your question is
around trust. Uh,
Yeah, I guess tracking use is one way of seeing
how something's performing, but also whether there's any
qualitative research into levels of trust
or attitudes towards those
Services. There's a range of places
and ways we do track that trust.
I think one of the, uh, most interesting ones is the Public
Service Commission do their quarterly kiwis account survey,
uh, which, uh, tracks
and it's a longitudinal set of data,
which makes it really valuable.
We introduced questions, uh, a couple
of surveys ago into digital services.
What that's telling us is
that people have high trust when they access services
digitally and when they access services non digitally.
So 86% of people have high level
of trust in the digital services.
About 78% are non-digital.
Now, there's a bias about people who have chosen
to access it digitally, but it does tell us
that the people are using the digital services very high
level of trust in them.
So there was a range of ways we're tracking
First and, and just, sorry, one final cheeky sum on that.
But those, that survey, is
that a digital survey?
How's that survey conducted?
I, I'm not sure. I'm sorry. That's
administered by public service commissioner.
I read the results, but I haven't got
close to the methodology. Yeah,
But there is a prospect that that's a online survey on,
so only people with online access
who are not easily able to access those services.
I'm not sure. Check that's a possibility, right?
That it's not capturing
people possibly who don't have that access.
It's been quite a long running survey.
I'm not sure how they survey. It could be telephone survey
Supplementary, Melissa.
And then we've got, um, primaries from m, memories from
Thank you. Remember working
on the digital identity framework, uh,
legislation and the conversations
that select committees actually have had.
I think one of the issues is
that people are still waiting for that, uh, wallet.
So one, uh, first of all, I'd like to know when
that is actually coming first.
Uh, so what will be, uh, activated by the end of the year?
End of the year? Very good. Looking forward to it.
Uh, one of the issues that people have had in terms of, um,
you know, being afraid to go digital is
because of the scams that have actually happened.
And often what happens is that when they're trying
to prove their, they have to upload their IDs
and all of the documents and, you know, and,
and scams have actually happened as a result.
So I think having a digital identity, um, you know,
in New Zealand I think is just really going to help.
But how have you noticed a, um, increase in scams,
uh, and, and how much of it is actually being dealt by?
Um, um, or,
or has, has the digital, um, you know, um,
uh, I suppose if, if you have looked at the size
of the scams and the, you know, um, issues
that people face in New Zealand has increased as a result
of, you know, digitalization
and how much will that digital identity reduce?
Have you done any work on that?
Yes. I think a fundamental premise, uh,
of why we're taking the appropriate identity we are is to
de-risk or remove the risk scan.
So one of the things I worry about at the moment is private
sector, uh, requiring people to scan
and send a copy of their
passport and then they hold onto it.
Mm-hmm. Um, that means that you create a risk, uh,
or a vector, um, for harm.
It's outside of government.
We haven't made any choices there.
Um, but that's how people have had to prove their identity.
A digital identity ecosystem, uh, will enable,
if you've got an identity credential sitting in a wallet
for you to confirm that online, it is not held
by that private sector company.
It's just a point of proof,
and then that's it, it disappears.
They do not retain the information.
So it is decentralized, it's controlled by the individual,
uh, and it should introduce a far more secure way
of proving you are who you say you are
and take a lot of that risk out.
But, um, I'll let Miles speak a little bit more about some
of them, uh, uh, plans we have for introducing the, the app
and the wallet will be, you know, initial version we we plan
to develop over the next few years
and introduce other functionality
that will take away some of those risks as well.
Sure. Um, I, I think we just, uh, remind ourselves
that the digital identity trust framework is the,
is the means by which guides us through, uh,
how we maintain social license and how we maintain trust.
So pace is very important here.
Um, so if we look at the channels
by which maybe a scam may occur, uh, could be
through an email channel.
Uh, one of the things that we're looking at in terms
of the pathway for, um, activation on the, uh,
app is messaging.
Uh, so that, uh, agencies can securely message people
through the app, uh, which reduces, um, anything to do with,
uh, scamming, which you get through, uh,
a normal text message or you might get through email.
Uh, so we're looking to build trust, uh, significantly
through that secure messaging
and later on the notifications.
Um, the other things that we've got on the radar, uh,
as we move forward is secure issuance platform.
So to make sure that the credentials, uh, are
properly issued through a secure platform.
And then we also, uh,
are investigating the biometric side as well.
Just to further put, put the security in.
Um, the frameworks that guide us toward the extent of, uh,
privacy security, uh, is all determined
by the digital identity trust framework.
So we're, we're implementing the act, we're implementing the
policies and making sure that we activate pace, uh, based on
what the Digital Identity Trust framework says,
Leading up to the issuance of the digital identity, um,
uh, wallets.
Are you doing any education
or publicity on, on that
to onboard more people?
Because there are still,
even though it's actually government driven
and it will be more safe,
because, I mean, you know,
the whole point about having the Digital Identity Trust
framework is so that people could actually trust that,
you know, as you said, yeah,
the passports are not gonna be kept
and it's actually more secure way
of actually proving your identity.
I think what we see, again is, um,
digital identity is sometimes quite a contested subject,
and, um, we are, uh, we really see the benefits
of engaging with people around the utility they have.
And so we released the Verifier app earlier this year,
as I said in my comments,
and so we put some media out, all that.
Um, we've material available on our website, et cetera,
but it's really gonna be around utility
and lots that will come from private sector.
So, for example, we're talking one large bank who's looking
at credentialing bank account number.
That means you can then prove your bank account number
through an identity credential that will sit in your wallet.
So no more reading out your bank account number,
emailing it to anyone.
And that's not a government thing, that's a,
a private sector, but I think that's where people will start
to understand what this is, how it works, the power of it,
and it's very secure way
of sharing some quite personal details.
So that's the best way to educate the public when they have
a need, making it easy for them to access a service
or share some of their information.
Thank You. Thank you. So primary from you, Andy.
And then, um,
we might go slightly over the digital time, if that's all right.
Sure. We'll Still here. Our time
Is yours. Our time is yours
Anyway. Yeah,
Look, thank you. Um, my, my
questions.
The Public Service commissioner has, um, been quite clear
that he sees, uh, digitization AI as being one of the ways
of making the public service more efficient.
Um, so I'm really interested in what you see
as potential efficiency gains in the public service
from digitization.
Um, so I mean, obviously if you're dealing
with people digitally, it's different than dealing
with a face to face or by, by a hard copy.
Uh, but also if you see any, um, big opportunities in terms
of, uh, the productivity gains for the country as a whole
outside of public service, um,
any stories you might have about that.
Yep. Sorry, the other bit I should ask is,
is the supporting infrastructure there
to do this across the country as a whole?
I know Chorus is looking to, um, to do more, um,
roll out a bit more fiber.
It's still not a hundred percent, but it's,
it's getting closer as the plan.
So just interested in that part too.
Yes. Look, I mean, there, there's a big
set of issues you've raised there.
I think, uh, one of the things I would appreciate saying is
that digital identity is a real efficiency
and productivity driver for the economy.
So, um, most times people have to prove they are,
who they say they are will be in the direction
of the private sector, signing a lease for a flat,
opening a bank account, buying a car, renting a car, uh,
and doing so quickly, easily
and simply digitally is gonna be a huge
productively boost to the economy.
So, um, we do think that digital has lots to offer in terms
of Sir Brian and his, um, leadership of the public sector.
He's very clear that we need to modernize.
He sees AI as being important.
Um, I'll just make a few comments on ai,
but then, um, miles might get a few comments around our,
our plans to, uh,
rationalize the footprint across the public sector.
So, um, we, we have been issuing guide for engaging
with agencies for a couple years around a, uh, around ai.
Now, we've engaged with this committee a couple times, like,
uh, brief Education
and Science Committee, um, several weeks ago.
I think it's still relatively new in
the adoption in the public sector.
We are seeing increasing adoption.
Uh, we're seeing increasing efforts
to build capability and awareness.
Uh, we're not seeing large payoffs yet.
That's the same in the private sector.
So I engage regularly
with the private sector both domestically
and internationally, in,
particularly in Australia and Singapore.
No one has quite crashed delivering material, uh,
return on investment or efficiencies yet.
But we can see the possibility
in the New Zealand public service.
The best example currently probably is call center
transcription where, uh, uh, telephone, uh,
operators get off a call with a, a customer, uh,
and there's a first draft of, uh, uh, call
appeared by an a call.
It takes about six minutes out in terms
of it's still checked by a person.
It's still confirmed, but there is a real time saving there.
So that's an example. It's, uh, gives you a sense
of there will be genuine efficiencies
that can be gained here,
but I think we're quite really in the process of
what they look like in terms
of modernizing efficiencies across the public service.
We actually think, uh, a bigger thing to do is
to look at the digital, um,
structure right across the public
sector and the digital footprint.
And we need to make some real changes to how
that's organized, and that's
the work that we are leading for.
So moment miles, you might like
to make a few observations on that.
Sure. Um, I think one thing to recognize is
that agencies are digitizing pretty quickly.
Um, the business problem we have is that, uh,
agencies have developed their own architectures,
their own technology footprints.
Uh, so when you look at economy of scale,
and as we start looking at making efficiencies across the
sector, it makes sense that the government, uh,
public service starts moving toward a target state.
And the target state shows us what is the plumbing needed,
uh, what are the common services that can be used,
what are the common assets that can be used?
Um, it makes sense when we start looking at, uh,
things like an issuance platform that we use once,
that we buy once, um, as opposed to buying 46 times.
So when we start looking at the, uh, the digital
target state, we are looking at
how we can consolidate the footprint, uh,
how we can make efficiencies, how we can make gains, uh,
but more importantly, um,
how we de-risk the environment as well.
How we reuse many times as opposed to buying many times.
Um, some of the initiatives that we've got in, uh,
in the digital target state is
what we term digital public infrastructure
and digital public infrastructure are things
that agencies connect to.
So we buy once such as an old government app, such
as an issuance platform, maybe a payments solution,
and maybe, uh, a data interoperability layer so
that we invest once, uh, as we start applying this
and we start aligning, uh, agencies toward it, we are,
we will be looking to see return on investment
and that return on investment and will, will come over time.
Uh, I'll just pause there if there's any questions on that.
I'm sorry, can the other part of
that was just the infrastructure to deliver the,
to make sure that we don't end up
with particularly rural communities
who don't have the infrastructure to be able to do this
Properly. Yes. That, that is
a responsibility of MB
who has the lead on, um, that structure.
You'll keep an eye on that too.
So we engage directly with mb. Okay, cool.
Thanks. Okay, so primary from Ruben
and then we'll move to Celia.
Um, just note for members that, um,
we will have the Minister for local government coming in at
11 and the areas
that we haven't touched on much are the coordination
with fire and Emergency New Zealand and policy
and the regulatory stewardship.
So that's the possible trade off if we talk
about this more brien.
Thank you. Um, beginning of November, you came
to the economic development Science
Innovation select Committee.
I asked you then about the, um, highest
and lowest users of ai.
Um, and you told of organizations that is you,
you talked about the highest being a C, C and IRD,
and um, I understand you talked about there were also some
departments that were less, um, about services
that use technology,
but of the services that do, which is the lowest user
of AI from those government organizations.
Um, I have to come back to you a bit more detail,
but I'll make a few, uh,
comments, response to the question, I think.
But the first is, um, it's not straightforward,
just identify what do we mean by use of ai.
So is it the number of use cases, is it the number
of licenses around copilot?
Is it the number of people who've been trained?
So I, I don't think we've actually
yet got a sophisticated set of metrics to give us a picture
of what do we mean by by usage And part that's
because it's not mature yet the uptake of, of ai.
So it's a little bit ballpark assessment as opposed
to really hard metrics around that.
Uh, our minister has asked us to look at
how do we put in place a better sense a lead table,
if you like, of agencies in terms to their uptake.
And we're doing some work around that
and that will help us better answer your question.
We can come back to you with a bit more detail about that.
What's the, um, thank you.
What's the, the timeframe on those metrics?
Um, what, having them in place,
I think we're having something by the end of this year.
Um, but I'll have to come back to the committee around that.
It is live work at the moment. Yeah.
And it's really to provide another source of encouragement
to agencies to make sure they're doing something.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you Celia. Just
Tiny thing on the digital id.
NZ verify is for the operators.
What's the thing that's for the citizens?
The wallet. The wallet.
So that, that's where they will hold.
So what's that called? Um, that'll be attached
to the all government app.
It'll be a wallet. So just
But it doesn't exist yet?
No, it's been at The moment. Ah, okay.
That would account for what I couldn't find. Right. It is
Literally like the wallet sitting on in front of you there
with your cards inside it,
but a digital version of that. Yeah.
Yeah, that's good. And um, yeah, I might be less likely
to leave behind in the chamber than that.
Be good.
Unless you leave your phone like lots other people.
I know, I know, I know Mike could ship me too.
It's probably where we're gonna go.
Um, do you have any interaction
or do other governments have any interact,
other government departments within the digital board have
particular interaction with blockchain
and that kind of technology or, or not at the moment?
Not particularly. So it's not something
that's a strongly focus for us, no.
Um, and nor for the other agencies. So
There, there's encryption technologies, uh,
which the public sec, uh, sorry,
which the private sector use that,
that may go into blockchain.
Uh, but it's not a topic that we look at.
Okay, thank you. We might wrap up on digital now if,
if people want to, and if if urgent questions come up,
they can ask them.
Um, so we do have a small period of time before the minister
or local government comes in, so we might move more
to our structured agenda in part three and part four.
Um, so I dunno if you've a change in personnel
that you want to make.
Do you wanna give them moment?
She's, yeah, I will. Back on. Thanks.
We will be having a change in personnel as relevant.
Just, um, while everyone's getting settled down,
just in relation to the, um, coordination with fire
and emergency in New Zealand.
Yes. Within the year under review, you'll be aware
that there've been a number of complaints raised from, uh,
firefighters who I appreciate have
a direct role with friends.
Although there is a relationship with the Department
of Internal Affairs complaining about the, um, the adequacy
of the equipment that they have to be able
to meet the emergency needs of, um, new Zealanders.
And obviously they ever probably the, the most, um,
immediate first responder role within the New Zealand
emergency system.
So would you just be able to, um,
outline from the perspective
and of internal affairs the steps that you are taking
to ensure that New Zealand is not in a situation where, uh,
their safety as compromised due to the equipment available,
um, to our firefighters?
Yes, absolutely. I might invite, um,
Melanie only carpenter's, uh, deputy Secretary in this area
to join the table, but I make some comments as well.
So there's a strong area of focus for our minister.
Um, she has made her expectations very clear to the board
who have had the primary accountability, um,
for governing fence.
Um, uh, she has heard messages, uh,
equally there was an acting minister of internal affairs,
um, deputy prime minister who was engaged.
Uh, she was on a period of leave.
It's very clear about his expectations.
So there was no uncertainty for us
and for the Board of Fence about the importance
of making sure that this issue is taken seriously.
So I think, um, we know that fins are, um,
investing heavily in appliance replacement.
So they have secured, since they're established seven
or eight years ago, 314 new appliances is another 70
appliances on lot, uh, on order,
including five aerial appliances.
Um, they're actively looking at how they, uh, disperse those
around the country according to need
and their network and how they're operating.
They do engage with professional firefighters in the design
and procurement process, so they test needs, et cetera.
Um, so, uh, and we meet with the board last week, um,
and, uh, spent some time with them talking about this.
So there's a high level of active engagement on this issue.
Did you wanna comment on,
Sorry. No, I, I've answered that.
I think you've, you've covered all the key points
There. Thanks. So did you
have a set? Yep.
Um, just on that, thank you. Uh, your replies.
Um, with regards to the trucks, what we've heard, um,
or what I've heard because, um, there's queries
around the safety and the fleet of trucks coming through.
Are those brand new trucks? Are those designed trucks?
What type of trucks are they in,
in just the issues around that?
Do, have you had any further information to do with?
Because that's what's quite worrying, uh,
what we're seeing on the content.
So we, we hear, we receive those questions too.
Our minister receives them, we ask very quickly
and they, they respond.
So, uh, for example, one of the issues that came up was
around, um, the gear and kit that sits on trucks
and whether that fitted into, uh, the new trucks
and the containers that were provided on the new trucks.
So we asked a question of fins, um, that's where they were,
uh, able to share with us that through the stages of design
and procurement, there is involvement
of the professional firefighters.
They are part of those, uh,
design specification development.
Um, but there are changes being made to
what equipment is carried on trucks.
And, uh, FE'S advice was, it speaks to some
of the preferences that individual stations have about their
kit, but as an organization, they have a, this is
what is supported and accredited
and what is able to be carried on the trucks
and should be carried on the truck.
So that is the level of detail we have got through
with fence around this issue, for example.
Yeah. Um, thank you.
Thank you for that, um, clear explanation.
Um, it is, um, a concern to NP specifically, um,
when we are hearing all sorts of different operations,
and you may not be able to comment, it's a sort
of a bargaining thing, um, the current
situation versus the safety of people.
My concern is EP is what we see the fires and,
and the response as first responders.
Their role seems to have quite expanded.
Do you, um, have any opportunity that you would give advice
in terms of their firefighters being first responders
and if they don't have sufficient equipment,
sufficient trucks, et cetera, that will have
me impact on their, as on their role as first responders?
I think one of the key reasons
for the establishment offense was
to recognize the changing mandate
and responsibilities that they have.
So it was to pull together a range of, uh, services
and to enable, um, a better depth of,
uh, support for that in terms of both equipment
and investment stations and services and equipment.
Um, in that first responder, uh, instance,
that really is the obligations of the board
and the chief executive offense.
Uh, I would, uh, also say where you hear questions
or queries in your electorate
and mps are very connected into communities
and you should feel free to refer those through
to the Minister of Defense.
Um, 'cause we are encouraging 'em to quickly provide answers
to those questions because what we are experiencing is most
of the time they actually do have credible
answers to those questions.
Can I just ask about, um, the meeting
that you had with Finns?
You said that you met with him, was it last, last week?
Was that, um, an instruction at that meeting to tell things
to sort this out because, um, there seems to be, uh, uh,
a huge problem not only
with the industrial action being linked
to firefighters telling us very clearly
that they don't have the equipment that they need, um,
but also that these, uh, conversations are not being, um,
addressed by feds.
So was did you provide an instruction to fess to solve this,
this problem, which is obviously a huge concern
to the public and the community?
I think, um, the ministers in effect
provided that, uh, over the last few months.
And the minister is highly engaged with, uh, Finns meeting
with the board and the ce, uh, fortnightly.
Um, and so has made our expectations very clear.
When we met with the board last week, um, it was, uh,
just joining a regular board meeting.
Um, and, uh, yes, we reiterated those expectations
of seeking resolution, but not straightforward.
Um, bargaining is a process of bargaining
and it's not for us to get too involved in,
so we were careful about that.
Um, but we were clear about s expectations,
but it was also about the working relationship between DI
and F, making sure
that we do have the right connection points strategically
and with governance, which we do.
So it was part of a feel like a regular
engagement with the board.
Part of that, they, uh, invited us
to their board strategy day in
the first quarter of next year.
So we will plan to go and spend some time with them,
their board strategy day as well.
Um, Thank you.
Um, just in terms of the board strategy,
do you have any opportunity to provide comments
or from like post this,
this select committee hearing, is there any opportunity
that you could provide that they could take into account in
terms of communication
or any improvements from a departmental perspective?
Now? I think we're talking
with things about three to five times a week.
Yes. And my team even more frequently.
Yes. So we, we are regularly engaging with them
and they'll probably be watching as well I'd imagined.
Um, so, uh, look, they, they know that
and recognize that they're under pressure.
They have a busy work program already.
Um, and as I said,
the minister has made her expectations clear
and the board has resolved, uh, to respond to, um,
both continue their capital investment program,
continue the process of finding savings,
continuing the process of making sure
that the organization is performing effectively
and resolving bargaining.
So they have quite a bit on their plate at the moment,
but they we're assured that they are focused.
Thank you. So just, um, maybe
to wrap up the, the questions on, um,
the relationship with Finn.
You've said that there's been an ongoing dialogue
and the directions have been clear from the minister.
Do you expect, when do you expect the that to be,
um, in resp?
I know that that's an issue with bargaining,
but that's not really my question.
The, the issues that are currently being purported reported
around equipment, do you expect
that there will be an announcement or a change
or some kind of, um, indication to the public
that this has now been resolved?
Or do you, do you expect that these conversations, um,
will just continue?
'cause I think, I think really hearing
that there's been ongoing conversations is not
probably enough for the public to feel confident
that these serious safety concerns are being addressed.
I think one of the things we've stress defend is they need
to make sure they're clear with the public themselves.
So it is their accountability.
They've bought 314 appliances in the last several years.
They've got 70 year order, five aerial appliances.
Uh, they need to make sure
that they're communicating effectively
to the public all the steps they're taking
to replace the fleet to investment capabilities
that are needed and how they engage the,
the PFU in those processes.
So we've, uh, really stressed it's important things
that they communicate effectively public.
And I would just add that it's a continuous process
to maintain and upgrade the fleet and equipment.
So there's not a certain end date in the project
where they can confirm it's completed.
It's a, it's a rolling, uh, piece of work
that will be continuing for many years.
Thank you. Um, so just, we'll invite the minister
for local government if he's in there.
Um, and just, um, thank you.
It's coming down now.
Hi. Good morning.
Welcome minister. Thank you, um, for joining us.
Uh, we've been, um, discussing internal affairs today
and we are moving on to PO of local government.
We've got 20 minutes, uh,
to hear from you very short period of time.
So if you would like
to make some extremely brief opening comments, uh,
that would be, uh, appreciated.
And then we'll move to questions from members.
Excellent. Thank you very much, chair.
Uh, very good morning, uh, members.
As Minister of local government, my role is to ensure
that local government system is effective, accountable,
and responsive to the needs of our communities.
It has been a challenging year for the sector.
Councils have faced complex priorities from adapting
to new regulatory settings, to planning for growth,
resilience in the face of economic pressures.
These conversations matter
because local government is at the heart of
how New Zealanders experience their communities every day.
The breadth of issues within the portfolio
highlights its impact.
It's a system that must continue to adapt
to meet long-term challenges while
remaining fit for purpose.
In August last year, the government set out our vision
for city and regional deals, a long-term agreement
between central and local government
to deliver better outcomes for our communities.
Since then, we've made strong progress.
18 proposals and three regions are now signed.
MOUs at which we are negotiating
deals will help unlock housing growth,
improve infrastructure,
and create jobs, while ensuring that councils have the tools
and flexibility to deliver the outcomes that we require.
This week I announced the government's proposal
for a rates target model, a key step
to keep rates affordable for household to businesses,
while ensuring that councils can maintain essential services
such as investing in infrastructure.
This announcement was a big win for rate payers
who were sick and tired of skyrocketing rates increases.
Uh, this model is gonna go through targeted consultation,
and I expect the relevant legislation to be enacted, uh, by,
uh, December, 2026.
The government does not think the local government is
serving New Zealand as well.
Uh, in recent announcements
and reforms that we have announced
represent the most significant, uh, developments
and changes to local government since 1989.
We're also, uh, proposing changes in regards
to the way in which regional councils are outlined.
I'm happy to take, uh, questions around
that last week as well.
We also announced changes in regards
to infrastructure funding and financing
and amendment bill, which seeks
to replace development contributions
with new development levies system.
This is a generational shift to enable urban growth
and fund infrastructure.
I'm confident that through the commitment of the department
and the strong partnerships across the sector,
we can continue to deliver improvements
that matter to our communities.
And with that, uh, Madam Chair, thank you
and I welcome your questions. Thank
You. T uh, thank
you Madam Chair.
Um, thank you minister for, for your time.
My first question is around the rates cap
that you have just referred to as, you know, uh,
rates cap might stop, rates increases,
but they do not stop costs that, uh, communities bear.
So will you
or your government take responsibility
for the additional costs?
Yes. Communities may have to wear as a result of that.
Change costs, like, uh, increases in fees
or charges to access sports grounds, parks, water charges,
picking up rubbish recycling, those sorts of things.
And so all the services, as you are outlined,
are important for our communities.
And I think, I mean, I'll use your own words, uh,
which you've noted to say that councils need
to prioritize their spending
and I agree with you wholeheartedly
in regards to that comment.
The rates cap model that we put in place puts in place a
target range in regards to
how much councils can increase their rates,
how they determine what activities
and what they prioritize is.
Of course they're ve within that.
But we are providing a flexible range
and we also are providing a mechanism to deal with, uh,
you know, exceptional circumstances.
We're gonna consult on that
and we are consulting on that to get feedback including, uh,
from local government sector.
And with that information that'll inform the legislation
that we'll put through next year.
Really, we are starting to hear comments
around the potential impact that this would have, uh,
from leaders around the country, uh,
including Auckland Mayor Wayne Brown, who says
that a a rates cap approach will, uh, mean, uh,
infrastructure project.
A key infrastructure project like CRL might be functional
next year as is planned, but it won't have trains operating
'cause there'll be no drivers who won't be an ability
to meet those infrastructure needs.
So what, what do you say to leaders like that
who have expressed initial concerns
already around the proposal?
Yeah, so what I say to, uh, members of,
of local government and actually local communities is
absolutely, uh, we understand that, uh, local government,
uh, is under a significant pressure in regards
to deficit of infrastructure.
Uh, and there are challenges in regards to
that infrastructure and how it needs to be, uh, put in place
to ensure that our, we have livable cities and,
and communities and regions that are, are appropriate.
But I don't subscribe to the skull of sky as falling in,
in regards to the introduction of some guardrails in terms
of how much rate should increase.
The reality is is that for those, uh,
in particularly in fixed income scenarios, as
as you'll be aware, 20% increases in rates year on year are
not sustainable for New Zealand, uh, rate payers.
And across the board, uh, we have taken on board that, uh,
feeling and that learning and have set to councils.
We need to get a pragmatic balance here around growth
and delivery of services, but also affordability
because, you know, I think it's unreasonable to think
that those on fixed incomes
and actually anyone in our communities are simply going
to just continue to be a bottomless person in regards
to rate increases of that quantum.
So we're gonna have to work through that.
I work through with local government.
Uh, but at the end of the day, I'm,
this is not a cap on infrastructure.
This is a cap on inefficiencies.
And I think, uh, there is a pathway through
that we should be looking at in a collaborative manner.
Just start one final sub manager chair.
Um, I don't think anyone's accepting that those, uh,
the magnitude of those increases are acceptable.
That's not the issue. But where we have even standard
and pause global who are now describing, uh, the proposal
as I think, uh, it will tighten the screws
on an already strained financial sector when it comes
to local government
and potential downgrades and credit ratings.
In light of that, if, if councils face, uh,
constant downgrades and increased, um, in, um, costs
around interest because of the cap,
will your government be looking
to recom provide some compensation
for councils in terms of revenue?
Or will rate payers be expected
to pick up an additional cost in return
for getting less in their community?
I think it's important to recognize that when rating
agencies look at these, uh, uh, situations
and policy situations, they look
so from a financial risk perspective
that they do not take into account things that we have
to take into account as, uh, politicians
around local democracy, around community buy-in,
around the impacts in terms of, uh, the implications of
that policy in the real world.
Uh, and what we are reflecting is the reality
that New Zealanders today are faced with rates increases
that are unsustainable for them to be able to afford that.
And we need to create a mechanism
of which the increases in rates are more aligned to
what is sustainable and affordable for those communities.
There are going to need to be tough conversations around
what expenditure is undertaken and is what is not.
But you know, I don't think it's any surprise
to any New Zealander that this isn't a bottomless pit.
And the challenge with with councils is they are monopolies
and so therefore they can increase rates
at whatever level they deem, uh,
appropriate within their political term.
And with respect rate, payers have no ability to be able to,
uh, deal with that.
And what we've seen is an impact of that,
as we've talked about, is significant
rate increases year on year.
And that has a real impact on cost of living
and hardship in New Zealand.
And we're not gonna stand by and let that continue.
We need guardrails in place and there needs to be balance.
Celia. Thank you. So on the issue of increased costs to,
um, councils, um, has the minister read the Trics report,
um, produced with the principal economist, Brad Olson, um,
talking about the increases, um, since December, 2020
and how those are not in any way related to um,
CPI inflation?
Yeah, I'll just ask one
of my officials. Paul James Stewart?
Yes. Um, I've had a quick look the report
and not read it line by line yet.
Um, but I think, uh, one of the points we'd make is that,
um, minister Madden is opening comments reference to, um,
changes to development levies, et cetera.
So just identify that some
of those cost pressures about growth
and infrastructure, it's not simply funded, uh, out
of rates renew, but actually, um, there are other ways
that councils need
to fund growth in the infrastructure around growth.
And that's really report reflected many ways those
infrastructure pressures
and uh, water services is different. Again, obviously,
If I may have a stop Yeah, no,
But No, no, I'd like to hear you first. Uh,
One of the areas
that councils can derive revenue is not simply
through the increase of existing rates,
but it's also through the growth of the number
of rate payers that are within the community.
And so we are not constraining growth on councils
that will also drive more revenue into councils in addition
to the way in which they increase the existing, uh, rates.
So there are two functions at play here.
It is not simply just, uh, a rates cap.
There are other sources of revenue and, and noted
before around user charges
and other things, there are rates.
CAP does not apply, uh, to those
and it does not apply to water.
The reason it doesn't apply to water is, is
because those are already moved into water entities,
which are under EC
and will be under economic regulation under the new model.
So, you know, there's belts
and braces in regards to the way that that's dealt with.
Just a final one on the, the costs
and charges to the community.
Does the minister recognize that
by putting a squeeze on rates which are paid
as a property tax, so
a somewhat indirect wealth tax in some ways, if
the costs continue to increase to councils, that
that may pop out as fees
and charges for families that are much less able to pay and
therefore is association make a regressive associ?
Look, I can answer the, the question in this way
and that is, is that, uh, I absolutely under understand that
actually all New Zealanders are feeling the
squeeze and the impact.
Uh, and councils are simply one part of that equation.
I also can state the obvious that there isn't
a magic money put an unlimited bucket of money available.
And so having a mechanism in place,
which is based on a midpoint of inflation
and the long run economic growth
and a staged manner in which to implement that,
to give councils time to consider that as part
of their long-term planning process and be that in,
but also a process for them
to consider their underlying costs
and the work we're doing around systems improvement.
I acknowledge this committee for the work
that they're working their way through on that, those things
as a package allow rate payers to be protected, uh, from uh,
what we've seen is quite significant volatility
and we're gonna have to work through that together.
But, you know, I am concerned about the impacts
of high rate increases on New Zealand households.
So we've got a supplementary from Tim
and then from Andy and then Andy's primary.
Oh, I just breaking into two parts.
Firstly, what, what feedback have you received
or have you heard, um, about the proposed rates cap?
I've, uh, received
and probably unsurprisingly, uh, significant, uh,
positive feedback, particularly from rate payers
who have been very frustrated across the country.
And there is projects across the board,
and I won't put into examples
'cause we are aware of what they are, of the need
to have some sensible
and pragmatic constraints in regards to
how much people's rates, bills are increasing year on year.
And I think there is an understanding
that there is a tension here
that needs to be played through.
We need investment, we need economic growth,
but we can't do so in sort of a wild west scenario of,
you know, whatever goes, uh,
because that has real world implications on communities.
So I've had a lot of positive feedback
and I think the point of the consultation process is to say
that we gather feedback across the country from New
Zealanders, from local government, from everyone that's keen
to input, to make sure that the fundamental settings
of this model are well thought out, well considered.
And we will take on board that feedback as we go through
to legislate this process.
And obviously when it goes
through a civic committee process,
it'll be more further opportunity
to consider and refine that.
And, and how do you respond to the criticism if,
if it is a criticism of people
who have said this will force councils to prioritize?
Well, uh, I don't think, and I'm not being disrespectful,
but I think the reality is, is that that's what
everyone in this country is having to do when you go
through tough economic times.
Mm-hmm. That is not an unreasonable expectation.
And I, and I do acknowledge, I think we've got a degree of,
um, I'll speak for others,
but degree of congruence of agreement
that prioritization I think is a good thing.
Uh, you know, the reality is is that, um, you know,
what we're being clear about at government is, is, you know,
we're not gonna stand by
and just continue to let this play through as it has.
Uh, we're gonna come in and set some guardrails
and make sure that people know the playing
field that they're operating on. Indeed.
Um, so two questions in the, in the rate space.
First one of 'em is in terms of what's,
what's essentially outside the cap?
'cause you've got this, the whole definition
of core services water you've already said is part of that.
So how do we make sure that councils,
when they are no longer deliver direct deliver
of water services or indeed it goes to, um, uh,
from a rate space to a, um, a user pay space, um, that,
that councils don't go, Yee ha we've got less, um,
we we're spending less on water,
we can go spend it somewhere else.
So two parts to that. One is essentially insulated
from the rates cap
because uh, we need to make sure the assets are retained,
uh, looked after and not undermined.
'cause that's one of the concerns there is there.
And secondly, how do you deal with making sure
that councils aren't given a free passes in a sense,
having water, water come outta the system?
Yeah, I'll get the team to answer
and then I'll follow that through a little bit.
Yeah, it's been an important part of the design
and minister's been supported
by an independent reference group that's helped, uh, with
that design because the question you've raised is the right
one, uh, what's in, what's out.
So, um, worked your way through
and generally we try to keep vast majority
of expenditure classes in,
so water is a clear exception to that.
Um, that's because, uh, we don't want, uh, councils
to create false incentives for councils to move, uh, and,
and uh, shift revenue
or expenditure around those other areas.
But the point that's been made around fees
and fee recovery, um, uh, is something
that's been debated in
that independent reference group as well.
Um, and I think be important for us
to keep an eye on that as well.
And what are the ministers already talked about?
There'll be subject to economic regulation
and I think that's worthy of a
few comments as well, minister.
Yeah, I think we've had the ability
through the local water done well process for councils
to in effect start to get used to
how economic regulation will work.
The rates capital model will be overseen
by an independent regulator as well, not, not, uh, uh,
any political that an independent regulator which
will in effect do that.
Think about how the, the Reserve bank operates
with inflation within a band
and you've got the independent reserve bank
that monitors and does that.
And so we've used a similar conceptual model for this model.
It is what, from our understanding, one of the first
times this type of, uh,
range based target model has been used globally.
Uh, and it is not the model being used in Australia
because of the, um, complexities
and the challenges that that
that they have experienced through that.
So we are being innovative in the way in
which we're adopting this.
Why, I mean, you know, and I am of the view
and I'm keen to work across lines here to get some agreement
and consistency of a good policy,
but I think if we can do this well, uh, this will set us up
for a, a policy that will provide guardrails, uh,
in a regulated model for an effective monopoly.
So, so all of those core,
the things which you defined in the,
in the systems improvement build, which are
as core services, things like rating services, footpaths,
um, uh, community services, et cetera, community facilities,
et cetera, they are all in the regulated,
but they'll all be subject to the cap regardless of
what happens in terms of
construction, et cetera. Price inflation.
Yeah, that's correct. In addition to the fact
that we're also looking at what other tools
and mechanisms can we provide to local government in terms
of funding and financing, uh, as I said,
population growth is another
mechanism for additional revenue.
That, that was the other part of my question.
So we had the, in terms
of you said population growth covering it,
we had the infrastructure commission in front
of another committee, uh, yesterday.
Uh, and we've explored the issue with them in terms
of growth, paying for growth.
Their best estimate is that growth pays for about 30
to 50% of growth.
So that means the other seven 50
to 70% lands on the existing rate payers.
So my question to you in terms
of the IFF levy system is whether we are actually gonna end
up with a system which actually growth does pay for growth
as opposed to growth actually making the situation worse
for existing rate payers.
Well, I think you've gotta look at, at the reality
of the status quo where we do have growth.
I, I'm not, IM saying that as in pay for
And is the model that we currently have under the status
quo appropriate and best place to deal with that.
Our view is, is that there is a need for us to transition to
a, uh, more enhanced model.
Uh, and you would've seen our announcements in regards
to development levies for example, which is another area
of optimization around the funding
and financing for that growth.
But I think if we stand back and say we need,
and we know that we are going to have growth, uh,
that is an important component,
but we also need to, one of the big concerns
by communities is, is that, you know, the infrastructure
and investment of pipes
and roads isn't keeping up with the speed of
that growth in many cases.
And part of that is legacy and deficit.
Um, but also, you know,
that's why the local water done well model
and I look at water care
and what we've done around
that work in Auckland is in effect allowed them to, uh,
set up much more sustainable investment in water
infrastructure than ever before
and do so in a manner that is,
is under economic regulation as well.
So you've got belts and braces, so your intention,
Your intention is that growth will pay a hundred percent
for growth as opposed to be a burden on existing rate payer.
I think we, just for that context, I look, I don't think,
uh, we've quite set it a hundred percent paid for,
but there have a number of big changes made.
So the development leave is one of those,
but honestly talked about, uh, water service reform too.
So water services delivery plans that council are required
to submit, they're required to set out how much be renewals,
how much be for growth and how they're gonna fund.
So we're looking to get transparency
and to drive to make sure that yes, where there is growth
that people, um, benefit from that growth both benefiting,
uh, are funding very closely there. Thank
You. Okay. Tangi.
And then we've got Celia
and um, Tom, if we've got,
Thank you. Uh,
minister, do you regret championing a water reform
package known as local water down?
Well where that is clearly setting communities up
to fail in the long term.
I mean no fewer than 42 water entities
is not necessarily going to deliver the regional scale
or economies of scale that was identified and promised.
Why is it that those decisions have not been
taken by communities?
You have an empowered communities, uh, to,
to make those decisions listens, just a level of failure?
Oh, uh, with respect to the member I have
and make no apology
for the reform in which this government has done to get rid
of, in effect mega co-governance entities,
which were proposed under a prior government
that had no community buyin
and no community support, which took away local ownership
of assets, which took away the control
from local communities.
We have implemented a model in regards to water reform,
which has fundamentally consolidated the sector, which
by assessment of the Commerce Commission, has indicated
that virtually all
of these water service entities are financially sustainable
in terms of 1 0 1.
That means that they have revenue to pay for their costs
and they have revenue to pay for their debt.
That is a good thing.
And we have done so without funding billions of dollars,
which was under the prior model to make this a reality.
We are in that position
and have been since the 3rd of September.
And actually as a result of that,
we now have in effect more council groupings looking
for further consolidation as they move their way through.
And by the way their communities support 'em to do that.
Local mayors and local counselors have undertaken
that reform, not Wellington.
Uh, and as a base mark in terms of foundations
of financial sustainability, we now have a sector
that is on strong foundations to take for,
take us ahead in terms of the future.
So I make no apology, uh, for that.
And actually, you know, with respect, uh, I wish
that someone had seen a bit of sense a bit earlier on
and got rid of the other model and done what we've done
'cause we would've been in this place three years
On that year in review. Thank you Celia.
Thank you. Um, does the minister
Consider that he's potentially taking the local
out of local government?
Do you want me to ask? By making the combined territories,
boards really see amalgamation as his
direction when a country that is
definitely successful, Sweden,
with about double our population, has 290 municipalities.
Yes, it has excellent services
and it has a considerably lower proportion
of local government income from property taxes
and a wider range of income.
So Sweden's got 290 municipalities,
we've got less than a hundred.
You are you driving us down to 10
or 15 mega councils?
Uh, so we are driving, uh, no one anywhere in the context
of where that final position is at.
We are enabling, uh, local communities
and, uh, mayors within those communities to take, uh,
ownership and responsibility
of their destiny in regards to where they get to.
Uh, that is pretty much a local on the tin.
You can't get more local than mayors
who are a Democratic elected in our communities taking on
the role and responsibility, determining their future
as a broader region, uh, simply taking out a layer
of regional councils, uh, which with respect
to most rate payers, they would not know
who sits in those roles in their community,
but they definitely know who their mayors are.
And I think a few around this table from their prior
experience probably might recognize that, um,
you know, it is a positive thing.
I mean, local communities are best placed
to make local decisions.
Meres are well placed to lead that work.
And the construct around which we're doing
around these combined territorial authorities will enable a
mechanism to get to a more efficient future state.
I have been surprised, pleasantly surprised already
by conversations
and expressions of, uh, broader interest around looking at
how can regions work more constructively
together than the status quo.
We have seen that 32 regions under local water done well
have come together to form 12 entities.
That is a game change
of consolidation in the local government sector.
And yet we sit here thinking that is somewhat
of a bad thing versus status quo.
It is the complete opposite.
And by the way, they're financially sustainable.
So like this is a journey of reform.
We are not going from, you know, um, um, A
to Z on and day one.
We are doing a staged approach.
And why, because we want to bring communities
with us on that reform journey.
And with respect, we saw examples where we did not listen
to communities and we see thought that Wellington knew best.
And I tell you what, uh, the consequences of that type
of reform are obvious for everyone to see.
We're in a new dimension now
and my view is we need to continue to work
with local councils to support them to
structure the future state that will
best serve their communities.
Thank you Minister. We have now run out of time,
but thank you very much for joining us today.
We will continue this discussion with your officials,
but thank you very much for joining us. Right.
Thank you very much, members, thank you
chair for the opportunity. Thank
You. And we might, um, keep
on the local government theme.
Please, please.
So, uh, let me know if you've, uh, got questions.
I've got, uh, tangy then Andy and then Tom and
Yes. Um, thank you Madam
Chair.
Just in terms of following up on the local water done well
staff, um, what was it envisage
that no fewer than 42 entities, you know, what,
what has the department had to kind
of change in its approach to potentially adjust
to the number of water entities
that are at this stage being stood up?
Uh, we didn't really adjust anything in a sense in
that it was a different reform path
and so it was just different.
Uh, we didn't forecast what we thought might happen in terms
of, uh, councils coming together.
We worked really actively with councils,
so we spent a lot of time out there.
Um, but we didn't have a forecast, uh,
if you like, about what would happen
In terms of the work that you've just touched on,
you know, working with the sector, aside from water reform,
what, what have you identified as areas where there needs
to be some improvement in terms of opportunity for DIA
to work more closely with the sector so
that there's a little bit more alignment?
I get that there might be dis inevitably there will be
disagreement from time to time, but
where is there an opportunity to improve the collaboration
between your department and the sector?
Look, we work really hard to be visible, available
and connected with the sector.
And I, and I think we are, and I get that feedback.
So we have partnership directors, uh, who are constantly out
and about engaging with councils.
They were in, uh, Canterbury this week planned
to go back in a couple of years time.
Uh, uh, we were invited when, um, LGNZ held, uh,
forums here a couple of weeks ago to speak there.
I spoke in the evening, I went back the next day
and spent time with the regional councils.
So we are actively engaged
and uh, we wanna hear what's on their minds.
We wanna make sure that we are clear about
what balanced policy, uh, priorities and objectives are.
And we look to work closely with
Councils. So you
don't have any sort of program of work except
what seems to be ongoing reliance on
existing structure in in the life?
Uh, you mean in terms of our engagement?
Yeah, yeah. Like it is great
that you're saying it's all positive
and you're, you know, you've got people in different roles
and you're going out to LGZ conferences and, and elsewhere.
But over the last 12 months
and certainly over the last couple of weeks, the sector is,
uh, bracing for quite a significant amount of change.
So how is the, the department kind of positioning itself
to try and work more closely?
I mean, you know, the government itself sort
of sit just on the one issue of regional councils
has identified that as the most significant form
of reform since 1989.
So what is your department doing to effectively, you know,
not change tact, but acknowledge the fact that this is going
to be a, uh, a time
for local government that they haven't faced
Before? Yeah,
I think we've got good foundations.
So, um, we've oriented ourselves
to being engaged with the sector.
Um, as partnership directors were put in place five,
six years ago as we've taken a number of steps
to be more visible, more active,
more engaged, uh, this work.
Um, uh, we've also secured, uh, additional funding
around city and regional deals, uh,
around simplifying local governments that creates capacity
and capability for us to do the work
and engage, there'll be programs of engagement
with the sector, um,
and we'll be responsive
to the minister's priorities around engaging
with the sector. Okay.
Gotta supplementary from Syria on that area
of the interaction with local government.
Um, one of your, um, one of the department's
priorities is to facilitate a better relationship
between central and local government.
And you've mentioned some of the things
that you are engaging with.
What are your measures, what's your evidence?
Which councils are you checking back in with
to see if DIA has made these quite big changes,
whether one agrees with or not?
Um, how will you know, say the end, the end of this
financial year, whether you have actually, um,
made things easier for local government
or not? What measures?
Uh, well I don't think we do have an, uh, an indicator
or measures around the quality of the relationship.
So we do think the quality relations are important,
but it's not one of the 150 indicators that we, we have.
So would, given the amount of change to local government,
would you not think that there should be a performance
measure of that relationship?
I think the government's been clear with us
and with the sector that they focus on is that, uh,
local government sector, uh, is responding and adapting
and is delivering good services efficiently and effectively.
And that's the sort of indicators
that they'd expect us to have.
Andy, um, I wanna start off
with core, with the core services.
So we've got the systems improvement bill,
which says there are a bunch
of things which are core services.
My question really is how do we make sure
that those core services are, they're,
the assets are being maintained appropriately?
So I would expect, now again, I've said,
made my feelings clear
to the auditor general when they've been here.
And because they didn't do that in terms of water over
a decade or so, they didn't say, Hey,
you are collectively under investing.
But if they was, if they start saying, well,
hang on councils, you are under investing in
these other assets, not water.
If we could strip that out and say transport assets
for example, you, you built infrastructure,
whatever it might be, um, those have been run down
to keep you under a cap.
How are we gonna reconcile those things
and what is the department gonna look for?
Is it also gonna look for
that you are maintaining the assets properly as well
as staying under the cap?
How, how are you gonna reconcile those
Things? Yeah, it's, it's a good question. I'll
make a start.
Uh, Katrina, you're welcome to contribute
or uh, general manager, local government policy here
to Richard who might make contribution.
But I think, uh, over a decade, uh, we,
we've put in place benchmarking
or indicators, we have tried to strike the balance
that you've described, which is a focus on affordability
and efficiency, but also asset quality.
'cause we don't want to inadvertently, uh,
just see reduced cost but actually degradation
and assets standard or performance.
So again, the best example currently probably
for us is water services infrastructure
and water service delivery plans.
Asset condition is a critical part of that.
Uh, and looking at what the investments are
and in a couple of places where we have at this stage, uh,
declined the plans of, uh, local authorities
and asked 'em to do some more work has been
around asset condition in particular.
So understanding that asset condition, make sure
that asset condition is thought about.
Um, and that is the balance that is, uh, sort of we striking
that systems improvement bill too is any transparency
around benchmarking performance and investment.
So it's not simply you're not spending money
and degra, uh, degrading the quality as,
and I don't know if there's anything you to that
One of the streams, one of the work streams
that we've had, which Richard can talk about the detail on
is what the performance,
improving the performance information
and metrics about local government
that is available publicly.
Um, uh, that hasn't, we haven't had a comprehensive set
of metrics, um, that compares key measures
for local government before.
Um, Richard, be much on an update on where that works up to.
Yeah, so the first lot
of the performance measures is already out.
Um, and it does look at your financial sort of side of it
and the next ones will be moving into an ongoing series
of releases that will be picking up things like exactly
what you're talking about and the
Basic what Yeah.
And governance sort of side of it.
But I think the other thing most importantly is that's one
of the reasons why the rates cap policy was talking about a
minimum flow of a 2%, you know, um,
and that is to make sure that there is still,
I guess a level of investment going into assets rather than
no investment in a 0% rates increase.
Okay. Thanks. Then can I just ask, just in terms of water,
so it goes back to the growth issue.
So I've had concerns expressed to me
that we are saying water entities essentially you've gotta
fund, but I want to see growth funded by growth, not
by existing, um, existing rate payers,
um, because that's not fair.
Um, but the, the water entities are being required
to put aside money for growth before that growth occurs.
So that then lands at the moment
or as of, you know, the next year, um,
we'll land on existing customers.
Is that the plan? And if so, why?
I think, um, growth, paying for growth is a,
is a sensible sentiment, but it's complex.
And as you've, I know it's complex.
You've exactly started outline that.
So in the water services example, uh, uh,
what we're asking is that, uh,
water service entities are preparing
and planning across a longer timeframe around
where growth will be needed.
What's the numbers of negative connections?
How will they be paying to those? Yes.
Uh, development levies, uh,
or contributions from developers will be part of that.
But part of this is also, it's better utilization of debt
to pay for multi-generational assets.
These assets are very long lived
and so it's not simply growth, paying for growth,
but it's also using smarter. So,
So it's preparing and planning
rather than providing at this stage.
Yes. Okay. That's important. That's a big difference.
Thank you for the moment. I'll Thank you.
Come up on that later on. Yeah.
Uh, my question, do you Want me to add you down? Yeah,
Tom, Tom, my questions around regional
deals, um, that's where its going.
Obviously earlier this year, three were finalized as
to be the first three that would be progressed being, um,
Western Bay of Plenty Auckland and then
Central. Yeah,
central Chicago, Central leads.
Yeah. I was making sure I got my, from the area, wanted
to make sure I got my vernacular right.
Um, can you give us an update
on the progress of these points?
Uh, absolutely. Um,
so we've been in negotiations concurrently
with all three, um, groups.
Uh, we are in the final stages for one
of those three uh, deals.
Um, a second one, um, is likely to reach, um,
or may reach, uh, agreement at the table with processes to
approval processes to go through with the council
and government early next year.
So you're saying, you're saying the first one is
effectively past that stage? No,
It's in its final stages.
Okay. Um, and then the third one will just take a little bit
longer, uh, to work its way through,
but we would expect that, um, by the middle of next year
that we would have, uh, the out of the three, um,
if there are three deals to be done,
then they will all be through.
Let's talk about, I've got quite a few questions unpack on
this side, but let's unpack, uh, the priorities
that are included firstly, in the regional deals.
Are they around specifically focused on housing?
Are they around transportation? Are they around healthcare?
Are they around education?
Does it vary from one region to the next region?
Until, talk us through that.
It would be fair to say that the focus for each
of three regions is growth
and economic growth over a, a 10 to 30 year period.
How each region sees the opportunity of the deal in order
to meet what they need
to meet on the growth is slightly different depending on
their configuration and where they, where they're up to.
So for some transporters a key to unlocking land
for housing, um, for all of them, social infrastructure is,
is a critical element.
So there's no point unlocking land
for housing if you don't also consider health and education.
Um, at the same time, um,
for others there's a stronger sort of innovation, um,
and technology, uh, type component.
So they do vary, but they're all focused on growth
and, uh, focused on partnership
between central and local government.
Now, there were 18 applications in the initial stage,
obviously three got that correct.
Is that right? Yeah. Yes, that's right.
And then, and then the three
that we've just mentioned previously, once you come
to the middle of next year and you've hypothetically got
those first three signed, um, what then happens
to say the subsequent 15, for example,
do you get them to reapply?
Do they update their applications?
Uh, is the process ongoing? How does that work? So
There's bit of, um, uh, we need to do a wee bit of a,
a kind of Ricky over how this process has gone,
both in terms of how the process,
First time doing it, right.
How the process is run,
and also what we've learned from negotiating the deals
and and so forth.
And it may be that, um, uh, and you know, the instructions
and around what a proposal contains
and what it covers will need to potentially change.
So, um, we have
provided feedback to all of the unsuccessful, those
that didn't make it into this round.
Yeah. Um, but it's quite possible
that early in the new year there'll be some consideration as
to what do you want to do going forward?
And um, if there are some elements that are very difficult,
um, uh, to negotiate, then you know, we need
to consider whether, what advice we're asking for on,
on those things in the proposals.
So we probably, the answer is, um, it depends mm-hmm.
And, um, uh, not likely to be considered
until early next year,
and then we'll, we'll know
what is likely to happen after that.
And then long term is the expectation
because these are a 10 year agreement, right.
That as you come to the end of the 10, come close
to the conclusion of the 10 years
that you would then renegotiate again
with the area in the region
and it would just be a continuous update.
What we have seen from the overseas examples is
actually they don't, they don't wait 10 years.
Mm-hmm. Um, so it's likely that, uh, we get moving with
what we can get moving in the first deal,
and then it's likely to iterate even within the 10 years.
So assumptions about growth may
or may not pan out over that period.
There might be slightly different priorities that come up.
So the intention is that they are live, um,
and that the implementation process, um, uh, is something
that, uh, doesn't blindly follow the deal path.
If the deal path doesn't make sense mm-hmm.
At a point in time. Um,
but, uh, it is intended that 30 year
horizons for growth.
So yes, we, we think you can,
you can probably only nail the first 10 years
of those in any of our, our kind of crystal ball gazing, um,
about what might happen after that.
Um, but it isn't gonna be one of those deals
that is left on the shelf and we come back in 10 years
and see what's happened.
Yeah. Naturally being from one of the areas
that's in the top three initially for our community,
it's an exciting prospect
because it provides surety of long-term focus, uh,
and resourcing and sort of can provide some
certainty to the community.
That's really important is that one of the main priorities
as to why regional deals is progressing.
And that's exactly what we're hearing from the councils
involved, that it's the certainty mm-hmm.
And as surety and the ongoing engagement.
So the details are important,
but actually it's what you've just described
as the real value of it.
That's what's really becoming clear through the process.
Thank you. Can I just ask one very short
Set? Um, I've gotta start from
Andy on this
And then I'll come to you. Okay.
Um, look, uh, so first bit is the, the other 15.
Um, so keeping them live
and keeping them warmed up, uh,
sounds like it's, it's something that you are
Doing. Um,
we've provided feedback okay.
To them on their proposals, um, uh, just
to help them consider that.
Um, but, uh,
what we dunno at this point is whether there'll be a call
for new proposals, um,
and with the criteria might need
to be modified based on the deals
that have actually been done
or whether, um, you know, they can, uh, we pick up
proposals that have already been put in place.
Um, so it will just depend,
but uh, everyone will have the opportunity.
Um, but probably we just need to get a deal done
and then be able to see, so what that changes. Yeah.
From what I'm aware of, um, there's some,
'cause the stuff about growth, if it's,
I mean if it's driven by housing growth and more people,
and it's not GDP per capita growth
and I'm really interested in those things where you've got,
um, opportunities which different regions have
to actually lift productivity, um,
and those ones which really drive New Zealand going forward.
And so I'm interested in how those get picked up.
'cause none of the words
that I've heard there are about productivity.
So the, um, the Auckland proposal
and the Auckland deal is about,
There is some Of the, it's about GDP growth over, um,
per cap over 30, 30 year period.
Um, and, uh, similarly for Western Bay plenty
and also the Otago Central Lakes is looking similar.
So they have got a range of, um, uh, objectives
that are about, um, growth translating into economic growth.
So, no, I wanna be really,
really specific growth in economic wealth being per capita
because growth just any other way is just not getting us
Anywhere. Uh, we,
we haven't set a measure that is, um, set
that specifies that every proposal has
to focus on that. It's
Not simply about more houses or better infrastructure.
No, that, see, that's what I'm really interested is
how do we make New Zealand a wealthier country per head?
'cause that's the only way we're gonna be able to,
That is the starting point in the conversation
with Auckland, for example. That was
Literally so, so there's plenty of opportunity out there.
So I'm really keeping those things live so that, that
that opportunity and whether those were the best three
and to choose greatly to the ones that have been chosen.
But, but there is a lot of
opportunity around the country and
We should back. Um, yes. And
that might feed into more specific, um, uh,
criteria around the proposals for the next round.
Yeah, it wasn't for this one,
But can I encourage you in that direction
or whoever's setting the criteria?
We'll pass it on. Thank
Supplementary and, and very quickly, not the 15
that missed out, but I think some of us disappointed
that Wellington didn't even put an
application in to start with.
When will they, you know, new mayors, new councils,
when would they have a opportunity to resubmit?
And I really hope they will, but when would that be
So that that again will just depend on some decisions
after and early in the new year, uh, as to what that is?
Um, uh,
we would expect they will definitely have
an opportunity next year. Thank
You. Primary
From Celia?
Um, no. No. Okay. Tangi,
Thank you. Uh, thank you.
Um, just back on the rates,
caping proposals on the government when it comes
to infrastructure
and council's involvement in infrastructure, they tend not
to purchase consumer goods.
They are, you know, concrete, asphalt, steel, procurement
of engineering services, those sorts of things.
Yeah, sure. The proposal is, um, aligned to household CPI,
yet the costs that councils have faced historically are
outstripping that.
So my question is whether you've
provided any advice to the government
around the appropriate, uh, measure of increase, um,
and whether you've got any feedback from, from others?
Sorry. Yeah, look, um, I'll invite Rich
to speak in a bit more detail around that.
I think as the minister indicated,
this is a bit innovative rather than a cap.
It's looking at their range.
Uh, there's been consulted on, there are, uh,
two different points that have been set out as to, uh,
that's 2% and the 4%, but that's for consultation as well.
Um, and this was based on the advice from the, uh,
independent, uh, groupers, uh, comprised economists, uh,
former CFO from a council, Amir, uh, council CE experience.
So, uh, it was their advice that those were, um,
the appropriate, uh, benchmark points, particularly
for a consultation proposal.
So, so just before the specific around that,
that raises another question about to
what extent your department was actually involved in
providing elements of advice.
I mean, we've talked about the strong relationship
that you have with the sector.
So what was the nature of,
of the department's advice in the government
breaching its proposal around
Landscape? Yep. We gave advice
to the government on it.
Um, we worked alongside the reference group,
then had a direct relationship with them,
but we were at all their meetings.
So, um, and we gave our own, uh, advice.
No, that's that. That's helpful. Cool.
Maybe you could just answer that.
Uh, yeah, probably the only other couple
of things I would say is the two main major infrastructure
drivers of cost are waters
and transport waters is excluded from the rates cap.
So automatically you are, you know,
putting one off into a a basket.
And then the other thing is, is
that the consultation is very targeted
and it is very specifically about the formula
and asking the sector that question is uh, top
and the bottom that has been set, is
that actually suitable and is that right?
So we will gather that feedback.
Thank you. Thanks
Celia. Thank you very much.
Um,
it was really about the performance measures.
You mentioned that we have some financial ones there already
and it's about the development of others
and to what extent you are thinking about having some
different bans of population perhaps
or different kinds of councils
for those performance measures.
Um, I've got a couple of examples of the differences
between councils.
I mean, Tara rural district council has got
around about 20,000 people
and 2000 kilometers of roading as well as state where
to which is obviously paid for separately.
Whereas um, HU city with a population of 114,000
has less than 500 kilometers of local roads.
So how are we going to have performed measures that deal
with such diverse communities are not even going to
where um, they might have ethnic, um,
differences like Northwood's going
to have a Viking festival, sorry.
Mm-hmm. Um, they're not going to have a Chinese
Luna New Year festival.
Um, and how do we actually say, are we going
to be measuring whether there is um, some aspect of
cultural inclusion in local councils
or will that be something that's too difficult
to measure and won't be done?
I think, um, we are acutely conscious that uh,
particularly local authorities there,
there are some real differences in terms of size, both
geography, population, population density spread, uh,
the infrastructure networks they have in terms of broing.
So we are very diverse in terms of those councils more
so than many other jurisdictions.
Mm-hmm. Um, and that is built into lot of our advice
and thinking on those benchmarks and measures.
Uh, which do you wanna speak a bit about that,
but I think part of it too is very clear about engaging
for councils so they have an opportunity
to contextualize those benchmarks for them as well
and for their community.
They're already separated out.
If you look on our website, we already just aggregate
between different sizes of councils
and groupings of councils
and we provide medians across that particular group.
I think there That's fine. The financial, yeah,
Well no, just in general.
Of course all of the metrics, we have separate ones
for your metros and other ones for regional councils
and your rural and provincials to smaller councils.
So we do try and compare like the like,
but also I think these are also new.
And if over time we sort of see
that we need further disaggregation, then we can do that.
We did work very closely with the sector when we came up
with those groupings to make sure that we were trying
to get light with Mike as much as we possibly could. And
If I Consulting with the councils on the measures,
given the opportunity they published on their own websites
and they put their own description there,
which can reflect their own context,
Whatever that might be. And
did you use the eight cities quality of life, um,
performance measures on trends
at all in developing those?
No, not that. Those have been taken as measured since 2003.
And I'm quite concerned that we will lose the trends.
'cause often it's not the absolute number.
It's is it getting better, is it getting worse?
I think that's a process that the
councils have done themselves.
So that's within the sector rather than central government?
No, I know it's done by the councils,
but I was wondering whether it would've informed your choice
of performance measures.
Uh, we did work closely with the sector on it,
so they may well have brought that through,
but it wasn't a very specific, I guess of, you know, sort
of named and identified source that we used to come up
with existing measures.
Thank you. Indeed. Yeah.
I wanted, um, one bit of, um, the significant, when you said
that two core bits, most biggest bits of expenditure water
that's been taken in transport,
transport councils rely enormously on NZTA.
So if NZTA changes its far rate
or changes policy situation, I know some,
particularly some small, very small councils,
NCTA is wanting to hand them back a whole length of road
and said, you know, that's 50
50 now instead of a hundred zero.
Um, those things make a huge difference.
What interface have you had in this whole process
with NCTA in terms of particularly of far rates
and making sure that councils
have some certainty around that?
And again, goes back to the ability to be able
to maintain assets?
Yes. Look, uh, you,
you are quite correct in your question about, uh,
the significance of voting for many councils.
Um, equally that it is an NZTA
responsibility statutory role.
So we don't have a role in their decision making, but
because of the impact we are conscious of it.
So we do engage regularly with NZTA
and councils tell us lots about
what they think about NZTA and the fail rates.
So it's definitely part of the context we see.
'cause our, our issue is then back a step in terms
of the long term plans and the funding
and financing for councils generally,
which reflects the contribution
they have to make into roads.
So, um, yeah,
So roading this year is about 21% of councils expenditure.
And yeah, so we work very closely with transport
and NZTA in terms of the overall sort of policy
and advice through to ministers on,
But it'll be a lot more, I mean the example Celia gave of,
you know, a TAR district versus a hut city,
that the roading is a much bigger
issue for the smaller rural
Council for some council, therefore
Whatever decision, so if,
if NZTA make a decision which changes those far rates up
or down mm-hmm Um, what do you do in terms of saying,
well done guys, you've now gone outside your cap.
And they'll go, well how the heck were we supposed
to keep within our cap when our funding ratio changed
and that that fundamentally
altered our ability to be able to do things.
How do we deal with that? Because
that is two government agencies which have
got different responsibilities.
I think back to the comments minister made about a
critical part of this is prioritization and priorities.
And in the same way that nz TA
is making priority choices itself,
councils have to make priority choices.
Yeah, I understand that. But, but if,
if somebody else changes the formula for you,
suddenly you thought you were able to do this
and then all of a sudden you can't within that
and you've gotta make some drastic changes
for something which is not your responsibility.
Somebody else has changed the, changed the rules
of the game, it's pretty tough.
There are a couple of mechanisms that we have in the So
what do you, the policy, so one of them is, is
that the idea is is
that the formula will be reviewed every three
years so that if there are
Significant changes, changes the fire formula is too
No, the rates capping formula.
Yep. So if there are changes in the environment
and the account of operating in um,
or the macro economic conditions of the country,
then we'll give an opportunity to pick that one up
and the other one will be the variation
process yet to be designed.
But yeah, it could well
Be, so that could be a variation
process. One could possibly
Be yet to be worked through. Okay. Thanks.
Thank you madam Chair. I wanna change tact.
Uh, I raised this during the estimates hearing, it's
around the, uh, extension
to eligibility for the rates rebate.
Uh, and some of the questions
that were raised at the time were around, you know,
how councils were going to handle
the slight additional sort of workload.
So can you just provide us with the response around
how the additional eligibility, uh, has,
has rolled out? It's now active.
Yes. Yeah. Um, Richard, you have to talk to this.
Uh, I also can ask Rachel who ministers as well.
Any numbers or No, I might speak has gone very
Well. We, we,
my top level picture is the money's going out the
door and it's flowing smoothly.
Um, yeah, and we've done quite a bit of work with councils
around trying to streamline the processing
and make it a bit more efficient.
So you wanna come to the table ly
policy, but administrative evaluat
Delivery a very brief answer. So
yes, we, um, have them improved the way
that we are managing the rates rebate
scheme, um, month for month.
And we are seeing an increased number of, um, applicants.
So we are returning, um, you know,
significantly higher numbers, uh, of returns back
to councils, uh, as we would've expected
with the change in eligibility.
So we can get you the increased numbers.
Obviously it just started in July.
So yeah, we've just got a few months of data,
but we are seeing the trend upwards as we would've expected.
And just one further sub Madam Chair is, um,
there were questions previously
around the costs applications for councils.
Do you have any data on, on what that looks like
for the range of councils?
I don't think we've got data on the councils
administrative costs themselves,
but that's the work we've done with councils about
how do we streamline or make it easier for them to provide,
uh, applications through information, through, uh,
'cause the volumes are gonna increase.
So how do we make it easier?
So again, we can provide an update to the committee around
that, but we have taken some steps
to make it simpler for councils and
We work really, um, well with councils, um, with regards
to the changes of the eligibility, knowing, knowing
that there'd be increase in, um, the number
of people applying for those, uh, rebates.
And as far as we can tell,
the council is actually working quite well, uh, the system
that we have in play at the moment. Thank
You. Thank you. We've,
um, now I think come
unless there's any burning, uh, questions
that you haven't had the opportunity to ask, um, we've come
to the end of our time with, um,
the Department of Internal Affairs.
So thank you very much. Thank you, um, for, for,
um, coming today and for your answers.
And, um, if we have,
I think there's a few areas where there's follow up,
Quite a few follow ups, appreciate warm view,
Appreciate that. And
also, um, members will have an opportunity
to send some post hearing questions as well.
But thank you very much, um, to all of your team
for being with us this morning.
Thank you very much, chair. Thank you committee.
Thank you. Thank.